d1_s01_ra	d1_s01_ra	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Applied Economics: Health and Environment	ALEJANDRO	HIRMAS	6a686e	Universiteit van Amsterdam	Learning the value of Eco-Labels: The role of information in sustainable decisions	Learning the value of Eco-Labels: The role of information in sustainable decisions  In this study we analyze the behavior of consumers regarding purchasing decisions in the presence of eco-labels. Consumers currently face multiple comparative rating systems when making decisions (e.g. three-/five-star quality ratings). Our study compares the consumers behavior when facing both quality and sustainability ratings. We also explore the consumers&rsquo; capacity to adapt to changes in such ratings. Recent evidence from the changes to the energy rating systems in the European union suggest that consumers have difficulties adapting to these changes in labeling systems (Faure et al., 2021). In an incentivized experiment, we ask participants to make multiple decisions between two products depending on their attributes (price, quality and sustainability). Quality and sustainability are presented as comparative ratings. In the middle of the experiment, we present the participants with additional information regarding the underlying values of the quality and sustainability ratings. In a between-subjects design, we modify the type of information received about sustainability. Namely, we decrease the relative value of one of the ratings for either Sustainability or Quality. We elicit beliefs about the values for each rating before providing this information and at the end of the experiment. Additionally, we use mouse-tracking to assess how long participants focus on the different attributes, which reflects the attention allocated to the different attributes. Our results, before the information treatment, show that participants believe both quality and sustainability ratings to have a linear representation. Participants show diminishing returns for both quality and sustainability ratings when deciding between items. We also find a strong correlation between attention to an attribute (measured as total time looking at said attribute on a trial) and the weight allocated to it in the decision. Finally, we find that participants adapt their behavior differently depending on the additional information about the ratings. Namely, by lowering the values of mid-quality ratings, participants focus more on high-quality products. When we lower the value of mid-sustainability ratings, participants shift both towards low-quality and high-quality ratings. We provide an incentivized experimental setting to evaluate consumers&rsquo; behavior regarding sustainability ratings. We find that if a global sustainability label is implemented, policy makers need to account for the linear beliefs of consumers (and concavity in willingness to pay). Moreover, our results suggest that in case of changes to the ratings, consumers will adjust differently to new labelling systems.	Alejandro Hirmas, Jan Engelmann
d1_s01_ra	d1_s01_ra	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Applied Economics: Health and Environment	SARA	MUSTAFAZADE	1be457	University of Montpellier	Market volatility and investor’s behaviors towards green, brown, and neutral assets- the case of COVID-19	This paper examines, risk-taking behavior towards green, brown, and neutral assets during unexpected change in the volatility of returns. We design and run an online experiment with finance professionals from Italy and France, who have many years of work experience, knowledge about investments, market crashes, and a laboratory experiment with students of the University of Montpellier, who study economics, business and other related fields. We try to answer questions about investors beliefs, risk-taking behaviors, and price expectations related to different types of assets during the market crash. Additionally, we look at their changes in behaviors before and after COVID-19 type market crash and make a comparison. Through our work, we aim to contribute to the literature on volatility shocks and behavioral green finance that focuses on finance professionals.	Sara Mustafazade, Sebastien Duchene, Dimitri Dubois, Eric Guerci
d1_s01_ra	d1_s01_ra	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Applied Economics: Health and Environment	XIAOXUE SHERRY	GAO	e0d9fb	UMASS AMHERST	Heterogeneous Beliefs: a Study of Causal Impact of Individual Beliefs on Vaccine Decisions	Information provision has long been used as a policy tool to alter people&rsquo;s behavior through changing their beliefs. Beliefs, unlike facts, are subjective and heterogenous. When the same information is introduced, people&rsquo;s beliefs are altered in different directions and magnitudes. Therefore, it is essential to know the distribution of the initial beliefs among the target population when predicting the effects of information provision. Past researches on the causal impact of &ldquo;information shock&rdquo; lack accurate measure of initial beliefs, which potentially could have explained the widely different treatment effects. To explore this, using influenza vaccination decision as an example, we elicit subjects&rsquo; beliefs prior to information shock and establish the actual causal mechanism through which behavior are affected by beliefs. We measure the information treatment received by each subject as an individualized value by comparing the new information she received with her initial beliefs, and demonstrate the value of collecting accurate beliefs using incentive-compatible tasks. This approach provides more insight into the causal mechanism through which information treatment affect behavior, which have been missed by the conventional binary treatment approach. Our findings are mostly consistent with the widely applied Health Belief Model &ndash; people are more likely to be vaccinated if they believe in a higher chance of infection and effectiveness, or if they believe in a lower chance of side effects. We do not find significant effects from people&rsquo;s beliefs about others&rsquo; vaccination behavior.	Xiaoxue Sherry Gao, Rong Rong
d1_s01_ra	d1_s01_ra	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Applied Economics: Health and Environment	ANNARITA	COLASANTE	842888	Università degli Studi di Roma Unitelma Sapienza	The rationale for the emergence of a green premium in bond markets:  the role of certifications, framing and cooperation	The current study aims at identifying the role played by certifications in shaping the willingness to invest in green bonds. We run a lab experiment in which, after eliciting pro-environmental, pro-social and risk attitude, we ask participants to invest their endowment in either a green option, a brown option or both by providing them information with a different degree of accuracy. Our results show that provide low quality information confuses people rather than help them in their decisions, whereas high quality information positively affect the likelihood to invest in the green option. We also measure the greenwashing effect by highlighting how this practice has a clear effect on both the trust investors have toward the signal and on the amount of the investment devoted to green bonds. Disclose high quality information, hence, is useful to both reduce the uncertainty produce by the greenwashing practice and drag investments in green bonds.	Annarita Colasante, Andrea Morone, Piergiuseppe Morone
d1_s01_ra	d1_s01_ra	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Applied Economics: Health and Environment	MATTEO	PLONER	77b655	University of Trento (Italy)	Boosting or nudging energy consumption? The importance of cognitive aspects when adopting non-price interventions	Identifying effective behaviour-change interventions to promote energy conservation in the residential sphere has been the topic of extensive empirical research. While existing literature has advised several successful interventions, their context-dependency is still an open question. Furthermore, existing evidence has primarily focused on trialling nudges, that is, interventions that influence behaviour directly by changing aspects of the decision environment and circumventing cognitive bias. Boosts, which instead aim to influence behaviour by fostering the competences of decision-makers and correcting bias, are still under-researched in this domain.<br>We present the results of an online experiment where we compare the effects of a nudge-like intervention and a boost-like intervention on decisions in an incentive-compatible energy management task. These interventions are trialled in relatively high income and low income populations. Finally, we repeat the experiment with the same participants after removing the interventions.<br>Our results show that income is a significant determinant of performance in the task, with the higher income cohort performing better than the lower income counterpart. However, this difference is largely explained by underlying idiosyncratic factors, namely the level of cognitive competences of participants. Furthermore, participants from different income groups respond differently to the interventions, but overall the nudging approach emerges as the most effective strategy. Finally, we report evidence of intertemporal spillovers. <br>We conclude by highlighting directions of future research to further assess the interplay between intervention choice and cognitive aspects in the field, in order to design effective behaviour-change policies in an ethical and targeted manner.	Nicolas Caballero and Matteo Ploner
d1_s01_rb	d1_s01_rb	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Lying and Cheating I	VERA	ANGELOVA	6568ae	TU BERLIN	Unethical Behavior Toward Groups	We investigate whether individuals lie more to other individuals or to groups, and how lying depends on the size of the group and the harm caused by the lie. We employ an observed cheating game, where an individual&rsquo;s misreport of a privately observed number can monetarily benefit her at the cost of the other side. The other side is either a single other individual, or a group of two, or a group of five. We also vary the individual harm caused by the lie (keeping the group harm constant) and the group harm (keeping the individual harm constant). As the privately observed number is known to the experimenter, the game allows to study both, whether the report deviates from the observed number (frequency of lying), and by how much (size of the lie). Individuals cheat groups less often than individuals. The size of the group does not affect cheating behavior. Lies become larger in size in treatments, where the individual harm of the lie is smaller.	Vera Angelova, Michel Tolksdorf
d1_s01_rb	d1_s01_rb	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Lying and Cheating I	SVEN	SIMON	000e71	Max Planck Institute for Tax Law and Public Finance	Is it a lie if I don't know? Self-serving dishonesty under ignorance	Ignorance of facts and laws may provide a convenient justification for self-serving dishonesty. This paper studies what decision-makers report when they do not know their entitlement to a financial gain, and why they do so. In a theory-guided experiment, I show that ignorance of one's true entitlement leads to a pronounced increase in self-serving dishonest behavior. Two factors determine the reporting decision under ignorance: (i) the decision-maker's belief of the true entitlement and (ii) the absence of a commonly accepted social norm. However, most individuals seek information once it becomes available, which limits the scope of ignorance as an excuse. Additional survey evidence on the behavioral motivations for uninformed reporting decisions in the field complements the results.	Sven Simon
d1_s01_rb	d1_s01_rb	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Lying and Cheating I	FRANCESCA	MARAZZI	f1eb9c	UNIVERSITY OF ROME TOR VERGATA	Who cares when Value (Mis)reporting May Be Found Out? An Acquiring-a-Company Experiment with Value Messages and Information Leaks	In an ultimatum bargaining, we investigate lying as falsely stating what one privately knows without, however, excluding that others find out the truth. Specifically, we modify the Acquiring-a-Company game. Privately informed sellers send messages about the alleged value of their company to potential buyers. Via random information leaks, they can also learn the true value before proposing a price which the seller finally accepts or not. Two-thirds of all sellers exaggerate the company&rsquo;s value (especially if the true value is small) but increasing the leak probability surprisingly only mildly increases truth telling. Instead, it reduces the size of the lies. Moreover, it decreases overreporting (exaggerating the value to sell at a higher price) but increases underreporting (stating values below the actual ones to increases chances of trade). Buyers who found out value misreporting anchor their price proposals on the true value but do not explicitly discriminate against liars. In contrast, sellers are fully opportunistic and make their acceptance decision mainly dependent on whether the resulting payoff is positive. Thus, morality concerns do not seem to matter much in this market exchange. Altogether probabilistic leaks enhance trade and welfare what suggests to politically facilitate and encourage e.g. whistle blowing.	Daniela Di Cagno, Werner Gueth, Tim Lohse, Francesca Marazzi, Lorenzo Spadoni
d1_s01_rb	d1_s01_rb	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Lying and Cheating I	DESPOINA	ALEMPAKI	23142c	UNIVERSITY OF WARWICK	Deceptive Communication	In cases of conflict of interest, people can lie directly about payoff relevant private information, or they can evade the truth without lying directly. We analyse this situation theoretically and test the key predictions in an experimental sender-receiver setting. We find senders prefer to deceive through evasion rather than direct lying. This is because they do n&omicron;t want to deceive others, and they do n&omicron;t want to be seen as deceptive. We also find receivers are highly sensitive to the language used to deceive, and are much more likely to act in the sender&rsquo;s favour when the sender lies directly.	Valeria Burdea, Daniel Read
d1_s01_rb	d1_s01_rb	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Lying and Cheating I	JUAN FRANCISCO	BLAZQUIZ PULIDO	a1e510	IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca	Analyzing deception, honesty, and trustworthiness in sender-receiver games	Informational asymmetries are present in many real-life situations where the informed party can deceive the unaware one to get a benefit, such as financial advising or politics. Deception can be carried out either by lying or telling the truth expecting to mislead the uninformed side. Then, understanding the intention behind communication is important to detect deceptive statements that drive people to unintended harmful decisions. This paper studies subjects' intentions in games where players can tell the truth with deceiving motives. In a preregistered experiment, we combine a sender-receiver game with possible strategic considerations and its subsequent belief elicitation task with a novel sender-receiver game where no room for strategic considerations is allowed. Joining the behavior in both games and the elicited beliefs, we categorize senders' behavior, distinguishing different intentions not identified before. Our results reveal that the unique use of beliefs to identify behaviors in sender-receiver games with a strategic component could lead to a misinterpretation of the deceptive intentions of some senders, incorrectly considering pessimistic truth-tellers as deceivers or not identifying senders who excuse their previous deceiving communication. Besides, we show that receivers' belief about the message truthfulness is independent of their role in the game, and few ignore it.	Juan Francisco Blazquiz-Pulido, Luca Polonio and Ennio Bilancini
d1_s01_rc	d1_s01_rc	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Public Goods I	PETER	KATUSCAK	adcf27	RWTH Aachen University	Does Financing of Public Goods by Lotteries Crowd Out Pro-Social Incentives?	Morgan (2000) and Morgan and Sefton (2000) suggest that one way of overcoming the free-rider problem in financing of public goods is to bundle contributions with purchases of tickets for a fixed-prize lottery. However, if some voluntary contributions are driven by reciprocity to expected contributions of others, introduction of a lottery can crowd out such contributions.  We experimentally investigate the extent of such potential crowding out effect. We consider three treatments using a within-subject design. T1 is a regular linear voluntary contribution game. T2 introduces a lottery in which every token of contribution automatically buys a lottery ticket. One ticket is then drawn at random and wins a fixed lottery prize. In T3, three out of four group members participate in the lottery, whereas the remaining one does not. That member instead receives a fixed compensation intended to neutralize the wealth effect of nonparticipation. T3 is intended to isolate the reciprocal reaction to others contributing out of desire to win the lottery prize (T3-T1) from an own desire to win the lottery prize (T2-T3). We find that, on average, contributions are lower in T3 in comparison to T1, indicating presence of the crowding out effect. We then further classify subjects by the strength of their conditional cooperation, a proxy for reciprocity, measured a&rsquo;la Fischbacher et al. (2001). We find that the extent of crowding out at subject level is weakly increasing with the level of one&rsquo;s conditional cooperation. This finding supports our hypothesis that crowding out affects mostly those individuals who contribute out of reciprocity to expected contributions of the others.	Peter Katuščák, Tomáš Miklánek
d1_s01_rc	d1_s01_rc	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Public Goods I	HUAN	XIE	c6f368	Concordia University	Polarized Preferences and Voluntary Provision of Public Goods: An Online Experiment	We report an online experiment of a public goods game in which two groups of players, a majority group and a minority group, have polarized preferences for the public good. The public goods game features a traditional free riding problem within each group and a conflict of interest between the two groups. Each player decides whether to contribute to their group's public account or keep the token in their private account, in both unconditional and conditional contribution tasks. We conducted the experiment using the MTurk subjects. The experiment consists of a two-by-two design, from which we find mixed treatment effects of different MPCRs and frameworks in the conditional contribution task.	Liang Wang, Huan Xie, Jipeng Zhang
d1_s01_rc	d1_s01_rc	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Public Goods I	ANCA	BALIETTI	ec4a1b	Heidelberg University	CANCELED: Perceived Relative Income and Revealed Preferences for Public Good Contributions: An application to air pollution	Across the globe, people tend to misperceive their true position in the income distribution. Theory predicts that a correction of this misperception leads to an increase in the demand for redistribution among the richer half of the population if people are averse to inequality. While recent studies do not always confirm this effect with respect to income redistribution, we test whether correcting perceived relative income has a significant and positive effect on the demand for environmental public goods, such as clean air, that goes beyond the demand for income redistribution. This prediction rests on the assumption that individuals derive a larger disutility from the existence of an unequal access to environmental public goods than from an unequal distribution of income, as the former might be perceived by many as more unfair. We test this hypothesis empirically with an online survey experiment with 2,000 Indian MTurkers. Participants are randomly allocated to either a control group or one of three treatment arms. In two of the treatments, we manipulate perceived relative income upwards or downwards by priming participants to think about a low (or high, respectively) income anchor group. In the third treatment arm, we provide participants with feedback about their true position in the income distribution. We test the effect of these treatments on (i) donations to an environmental public good and (ii) stated support for environmental public policies. The results show a significant increase in both outcome measures if participants&rsquo; perceived relative income was manipulated upwards. These findings confirm the presence of environmental inequality aversion.	Anca Balietti, Angelika Budjan, Tillmann Eyemess
d1_s01_rc	d1_s01_rc	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Public Goods I	IVAN	AJDUKOVIC	bb7e4f	Burgundy School of Business	SELFISH NOW, ALTRUISTIC (FOR) TOMORROW? INTER VS. INTRA-GENERATIONAL STRATEGIES FOR THE PRESERVATION OF A COMMON RESOURCE	Environmental protection requires costly actions taken for other people’s benefit. Those actions are irrational for selfish individuals, but may not be for those who care for the well-being of people close to them, for instance in next generations. We compare two situations of exploitation of a common resource: a situation in which individuals are members of successive generations, without dynastic link (1), and a situation in which individuals of various generations are members of dynasties of non-overlapping generations (2). Our results show that individuals who know that their extraction decision will impact members of their dynasty belonging to future generations make a significantly lower extraction than others. 	Eli Spiegelmann, Ivan Ajdukovic
d1_s01_rc	d1_s01_rc	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Public Goods I	EUGENE	MALTHOUSE	b029c7	University of Warwick	How might inequalities between nations impact the international effort to avert climate change?	Many of our most pressing challenges, from combating climate change to dealing with pandemics, are collective action problems: situations in which individual and collective interests conflict with each other. In such situations, members of a community each face a dilemma about making individually costly but collectively beneficial contributions towards the common good. Understanding which factors influence people's willingness to make these contributions is vital for the design of policies and institutions that support the attainment of collective goals. In this study we investigate how inequalities, and different beliefs about the perceived causes of these inequalities, impact individual-level behaviour and group-level outcomes. We find that richer participants consistently contribute a lower proportion of their wealth than poorer participants – regardless of the cause (i.e., merit vs. luck) of their higher wealth. And, relatedly, that merit-based and luck-based groups experience similar outcomes. Lastly, we report that poorer participants have a disproportionate impact on group success. We discuss implications for policymakers and international climate change negotiations.	Eugene Malthouse, Charlie Pilgrim, Daniel Sgroi, Thomas T. Hills
d1_s01_rd	d1_s01_rd	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences I	MARKUS	EYTING	6c9aa3	JGU MAINZ, HEIDELBERG UNIVERSITY, STANFORD UNIVERSITY	Why do we Discriminate? The Role of Motivated Reasoning	This study contributes to our understanding of the underlying causes of discrimination by providing a link between taste and belief-based discrimination through the mechanism of motivated reasoning. It provides first evidence on how this insight can be utilized to design policy interventions that effectively alleviates this form of discrimination. In a series of online experiments, experimental employers engage in repeated hiring decisions for which they are provided with various forms of individual-level information. It can be shown, that the employers systematically search for information that supports their motive while they disregard information that contradicts their motive. Finally, I show that reducing employers&rsquo; wiggle room to interpret information signals alleviates discrimination by reducing systematic information processing behavior.	NA
d1_s01_rd	d1_s01_rd	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences I	JANA	FREUNDT	1d9894	University of Fribourg	Intrinsic Preferences for Autonomy	We provide large-scale evidence for the existence of intrinsic preferences for choice autonomy. The contribution of our paper is fourfold: First, we provide a novel and widely applicable incentivized measurement tool for intrinsic preferences for autonomy, and show that such preferences exist in two large international samples. Second, we assess the antecedents of intrinsic preferences for autonomy by relating our preference measure to existing personality measures from psychology (e.g., General Index of Autonomy (Deci and Ryan 1985, 2006), Locus of Control (Rotter 1966), Generalized Self-efficacy (Bandura 2006, Schwarzer and Jerusalem 1995)). Third, we validate a simple survey measure of intrinsic preferences for autonomy in a pre-registered replication study. Finally, we relate our measure of intrinsic preferences for autonomy to other preferences, attitudes and beliefs. In particular, we assess to what extend it can predict political behavior and attitudes such as support for paternalist interventions.	Jana Freundt, Holger Herz, Leander Kopp
d1_s01_rd	d1_s01_rd	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences I	ROBERTO	DI PAOLO	808bfb	IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca	Manipulating Cognition in the One-Shot Stag-Hunt Game Played Online	We run a mixed design online experiment where we attempt to manipulate participants' cognition (between-subject) while they play a series of one-shot Stag-Hunt games with different payoffs (within-subject). Participants face three conditions: the baseline, where there is no constraint on decision-making; the time delay treatment, where participants have to wait 40 seconds before picking an action; and the motivated delay treatment, where participants must wait 40 seconds and are required to write a motivation for their choice. Results show that individuals are less likely to choose Stag (collaborate) in the motivated delay treatment than in the other two conditions. There are no differences between the baseline and the time delay treatment. Regression analysis shows that both treatments increase the extent to which the payoff structure accounts for participants' actual behavior. Text analysis of the written motivations suggests that the choice of Stag goes with a more positive mood.	E. Bilancini, L. Boncinelli, R. Di Paolo
d1_s01_rd	d1_s01_rd	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences I	TALI	REGEV	7c2fb0	Reichman University (IDC)	Do Languages Generate Future-Oriented Economic Behavior? Experimental Evidence for Causal Effects	Studies have shown that the use of languages which grammatically associate the future and the present tends to correlate with more future-oriented behavior. We take an experimental approach to go beyond correlation. We asked bilingual research participants, people fluent in two languages (12 language pairs) which differ in the way they encode time, to make a set of future-oriented economic decisions. We find that participants addressed in a language in which the present and the future are marked more distinctly tended to value future events less than participants addressed in a language in which the present and the future are similarly marked. We supplement the analysis with a within-person experiment.	Tamar Kricheli-Katz, Ian Ayres and Tali Regev
d1_s01_rd	d1_s01_rd	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences I	ANTONIO	FILIPPIN	474adc	Università degli Studi Milano Statale	The Goods, the Bads, and the Curvature	Although our life very often involves unpleasant activities, the economic research focuses almost exclusively on "goods" and not on &ldquo;bads.&rdquo; "From a theoretical point of view, the justification is that the toolbox is the same. However, the empirical research also tends to overlook the choice of &ldquo;bads&rdquo; even when the implications are definitely relevant albeit counterintuitive. For example, borrowing from Prospect Theory the diminishing sensitivity in the loss domain, an implication that arises is that subjects should be averse to diversification when choosing between &ldquo;bads.&rdquo; Indeed, Filippin and Mantovani (2022) find aversion to diversification in a survey where subjects face hypothetical choices between fatalities and jobs lost during the pandemic. In this paper we test experimentally whether the &ldquo;goods&rdquo; vs. &ldquo;bads&rdquo; framing is responsible for the flip in the curvature of the indifference curves. Preliminary evidence from a pilot experiment confirms that the choice among the very same fundamentals induces convex indifference curves (preference for diversification) in the &ldquo;goods&rdquo; domain, and concave indifference curves (aversion to the diversification) in the &ldquo;bads&rdquo; domain.  	Antonio Filippin, Marco Mantovani
d1_s01_re	d1_s01_re	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Decision Theory & Risk I	KONSTANTINOS	GEORGALOS	245d81	Lancaster University	Biases vs Heuristics in Risky Choice: A Toolbox Model Approach	Rich evidence from economics and psychology experiments has confirmed that human beings often deviate from the Bayesian rational decision-making model. As a response, the theoretical literature, in an effort to explain the observed violations of rationality, has suggested either the use of generalisations of the standard Expected Utility model based on optimisation behaviour, such as Prospect Theory, or the use of fast and frugal heuristics (rules of thumb). According to the latter, decision makers are equipped with a set of strategies and select among them when faced with a decision, modelled as probabilistic draws from a toolbox of heuristic rules. While the empirical literature has provided exhaustive tests of one-to-one comparisons between Prospect Theory and a particular heuristic (e.g. the Priority Heuristic), there is a lack of empirical evidence on how well a toolbox model of risky choice would perform against Prospect Theory. In this paper we use data on risky choice from various experimental studies, in the domains of gains and losses, and using Bayesian Hierarchical estimation techniques, we rigorously test the predictive and descriptive performance of the cognitive toolbox model of risky choice against the Prospect Theory specification.	Konstantinos Georgalos
d1_s01_re	d1_s01_re	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Decision Theory & Risk I	JOANNA	RACHUBIK	e697d1	University of Warsaw	Cognitive biases and emotions: A framing experiment	In two online experiments, we manipulated the framing of a number of classic puzzles (decisions under risk), interpreted in the literature as indicative of cognitive biases. These include misperception of exponential growth, base rate neglect/fallacy, misestimation of compound probability, gain/loss framing effect, loss aversion, inability to interpolate, and sample size neglect in beliefs update. We then compared the prevalence of cognitive biases between treatments. These involved COVID-19-related framing and versions featuring other types of risk: a serious but non-lethal risk of unemployment and a minor medical risk of a common cold.  On top of the above, we also (randomly) asked half of the participants two COVID-19 related questions asking (i) if they know anyone who had severe side effects after their COVID-19 vaccine shot and/or (ii) if they know anyone who was hospitalized or died because of COVID-19. Next, we asked them a block of vaccine-related questions, hypothesizing that those who realize that they do not know anyone from (i) and do know someone from (ii) would be induced to state a higher willingness for future vaccinations. We conducted the study in Polish in Poland, English in the United States, England, Kenya, and New Zealand, and Spanish in Spain, Argentina, and Mexico. The results are pending.	Joanna Rachubik, Michal Krawczyk
d1_s01_re	d1_s01_re	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Decision Theory & Risk I	DIMITRA	PAPADOVASILAKI	cb2896	Lake Forest College	CANCELED: PORTFOLIO DECISIONS AND RACIAL DISCRIMINATION	We use data from the US Health and Retirement Study to examine the relationship between individual portfolio decisions and perceived discrimination, with a focus on racial-discrimination. We show that sensing racial discrimination has a much bigger association with shaping portfolio decisions than any other type of discrimination. Perceived racial discrimination explains not only the choice to opt-in risky financial assets, but also the amount of assets held. Specifically, racial discrimination reduces the probability of holding risky assets by 4.6%, and the amount of these holdings by 3.3%. Most of the respondents who report being racially discriminated against, are non-White, and thus such experiences add to the racial wealth inequality.  	Alessandro Bucciol, Dimitra Papadovasilaki
d1_s01_re	d1_s01_re	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Decision Theory & Risk I	YAO THIBAUT	KPEGLI	74db81	Groupe d'Analyse et de Théorie Economique Lyon St-Etienne	Against the Odds!  The Tradeoff Between Risk and Incentives is Alive and Well	A fundamental result of principal-agent theory is the tradeoff between risk and incentives. Yet, evidence for it has been elusive. We provide theoretical and experimental analyses of the tradeoff under two alternatives decisions theories to expected utility theory (EUT): Rank-dependent utility (RDU) and Mean-Variance-Skewness (MVS). At a theoretical level, we show that RDU predicts, unlike EUT, the possibility to observe the tradeoff when agents are risk-seeking. In contrast, we show that MVS predicts, unlike EUT, the possibility of the absence of the tradeoff when the agents are risk-adverse. Using incentivized experiments covering a broad range of probabilities of the output shock, we confirm experimentally the robustness of risk-incentive tradeoff predicted by rank dependent utility theory: risk-seeking agents can exhibit the tradeoff. Our findings are not only reassuring for principal-agent theory, but they also suggest it can be applied to situations in which agents are likely to be risk-seeking as is, for example, the case of executive compensation.	Brice Corgnet, Roberto Hernan-Gonzalez, Yao Thibaut Kpegli, Adam Zylbersztejn
d1_s01_re	d1_s01_re	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Decision Theory & Risk I	JOHANNA	KOKOT	c19bb4	University of Hamburg	Dynamics of Risk Preferences in the Context of the Covid-19 Pandemic: Experimental Evidence from seven European Countries	We study risk preferences in the context of the coronavirus pandemic. Contact behavior became relevant during the current pandemic, and social distancing became a valid measure to contain the incidence of infection. We explicitly analyze the interaction of contact behavior and the risk of contracting SARS-CoV-2. We conducted a repeated and framed version of the bomb risk elicitation task in a large-scale pre-registered survey experiment with a sample from seven European countries. Participants decided which people they wanted to meet in a 5x5 grid. One of these persons was infected with SARS-CoV-2. We investigate the reinforcement effect, i.e., whether people reduce their contacts after contacting someone infected with the coronavirus. We find that risk aversion increases after having contact with a person infected with the coronavirus. Moreover, our results indicate that mental accounting and choice bracketing has an influence on this dynamic process. We observe considerable heterogeneity among the seven countries considered. This applies to the absolute level of risk aversion and the reinforcement effect. We also find heterogeneous interactions with pandemic-related behavior. The results imply that decisions under risk in the pandemic should be considered in a dynamic context.	Benedicta Hermanns, Johanna Kokot
d1_s01_rf	d1_s01_rf	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals I	YILONG	XU	d10948	Preferably not on the last day due to potential travel restrictions (we must fly back on the same day after the conference)	Noblesse Oblige:  Holding High-Status Individuals to Higher Standards	Although there is evidence for the generosity of high-status individuals, there seems to be a strong perception that the elites are selfish and contribute little to others&rsquo; welfare, and even less so than poorer people. We argue that this perception may derive from a gap between normative and empirical expectations regarding the behavior of the elites. Using large-scale survey experiments, we show that high-status individuals are held to higher ethical standards in both the US and China, and that there is a strong income gradient in normatively expected generosity. We also present evidence for a gap between people&rsquo;s normative expectations of how the rich should behave, and their empirical expectations of how they actually do: empirical expectations are generally lower than both normative expectations and actual giving.	Stefan T. Trautmann , Xianghong Wang, Yijie Wang, and Yilong Xu
d1_s01_rf	d1_s01_rf	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals I	ANDREA	GUIDO	f87ec2	BURGUNDY SCHOOL OF BUSINESS	Moral suasion in collective action problems: evidence from a long-term experiment	The use of moral appeals is a cheap and widely-used behavioral intervention to affect others behavior. Yet, extant experimental work has reported both positive and null evidence on the effect of moral suasion on cooperation. One conjecture explaining the presence of mixed results is the existence of compensating behavior. In this work, we aim at testing whether people's tendency to follow rules determines their reaction towards utilitarian messages. By designing a long-term online experiment, we elicit subjects' rule-following type and observe their behavior in a repeated Common Pool Resources game, with and without messaging. Our results show that people who are intrinsically inclined to follow rules shift behavior in compliance with the message content, while people who are less inclined to follow rules react in the opposite direction.	Tverskoi, Gavrilets, Andrighetto, Sanchez
d1_s01_rf	d1_s01_rf	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals I	MARGARET	SAMAHITA	7e4a95	University College Dublin	Does online backlash stifle free speech?	We study public expression in the context of strong social norms that can induce conformity and self-censorship. We present a model that highlights how social pressure can affect public opinion either through a change in publicly stated views towards a norm (conformity) or by inducing self-censorship (silence). In a pre-registered online experiment in the US, we elicit participants' views on two controversial issues (race and gender) and their willingness to publish these views online in an incentivized manner. The empirical patterns are consistent with the presence of ideologically left-wing social norms: participants who held left-wing views were more willing to publish these, and individuals who were randomly assigned to a publication prospect treatment conformed by reporting that they held relatively more left-wing views. However, a priming information treatment, in which individuals were informed about cancel culture and the potential negative consequences of social media posts, did not induce substantial conformity or silencing. Instead, participants became somewhat more willing to publish their views and, in the publication prospect treatment, less willing to conform. The results suggest that heightened awareness about cancel culture increases individual's conviction in their own opinion and their willingness to make these public.  Finally, using data from Twitter and a triple-difference research design we show that users who experienced online social backlash after expressing opinions about race or gender issues did not significantly change their online behaviour.	Juan S Morales, Margaret Samahita
d1_s01_rf	d1_s01_rf	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals I	CHRISTIAN	KOCH	a56d25	University of Vienna	Anti-immigration stances: An experimental investigation of economic and behavioral factors	Recent years have seen a surge in populism and anti-migration sentiments around the world. Economic and non-economic factors have been suggested as a potential explanation and we propose a novel experimental design analyzing their relative importance. We focus on two potential behavioral drivers of anti migration stances, self-serving feelings of entitlement and moral self-signaling concerns. Reassuringly, we find that economic factors play a key role but that behavioral factors are also non-negligible, leading to an effect of roughly half the economic impact. Moreover, these factors interact with economic incentives as their effect is most pronounced when incentives are &lsquo;muted&rsquo;, i.e., neither positive nor negative. Finally, those of our subjects that perceive real-world migrants as culturally more distant or as free riders tend to reject migration more in our experiment.	Christian Koch, Jean-Robert Tyran, Linda Deszö
d1_s01_rf	d1_s01_rf	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals I	ANASTASIA	DANILOV	67d422	Humboldt-University of Berlin	Exogenous and endogenous corporate value statements and help (or sabotage) in the rank-order tournaments - A laboratory experiment	How corporate value statements affect help and sabotage in the rank-order tournaments? In particular, we study the effect of two popular corporate value statements - individual (i.e., promoting individual excellence) and cooperative (i.e., promoting team work) - on agents effort and help provision under the combination of relative rewards and team incentives. The value statements are either selected by agents or randomly assigned by the computer. In a one-shot experiment, we observe that the cooperative value statement encourages significantly more help than the baseline. However, help and sabotage levels under the self-chosen cooperative value statements are not higher than under the exogenously assigned value ones. The individual value statement, however, induces far more sabotage when it is randomly assigned to the subject by computer. This result suggests that the exogenously assigned individual guidelines provide a certain entitlement to agents to sabotage their peers.	Christine Harbring, Bernd Irlenbusch
d1_s01_rg	d1_s01_rg	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Networks & Contests	JONATHAN	STÄBLER	dd0315	GESS/ University of Mannheim	Spite in Litigation	The goal of this paper is to study how litigation and settlement behavior is affected by subjects motivated by spiteful preferences -- a potentially common driver for litigation behavior. We focus on litigation and settlement behavior both under the American and the English fee-shifting rule. To evaluate our theoretical predictions, we conduct an online experiment. We find that participants exhibit higher litigation expenditures under the English fee-shifting rule and that there is no difference for settlement requests. More importantly, we find that litigation expenditures and settlement requests are higher for more spiteful participants. The relative increase in litigation expenditures due to spite is more pronounced under the American fee-shifting rule. We further find that the expected payoff for more spiteful societies is much lower than for less spiteful societies. This effect is particularly pronounced for low-merit cases under the English rule compared to a constant cost under the American rule.	Wladislaw Mill and Jonathan Stäbler
d1_s01_rg	d1_s01_rg	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Networks & Contests	YI-SHAN	LEE	257f7b	Chinese University of Hong Kong	Effects of Conformity on Network Formation and Information Aggregation	We conduct an experiment to investigate the effect of conformity on coordinated choices and network structure. Individuals first receive information about the state of the world and are aware of how much a society values conformity. They then choose their connections deciding the additional information they observe, and select an action according to their information. Preliminary analyses show supporting evidence for two monotonicity properties. I ) Agents will first observe more popular signals. II) More observed agents observe fewer signals. Nevertheless, our results also demonstrate two behavioural effects. First, individuals exhibit cognitive tradeoffs between network formation and information aggregation&mdash;the information aggregation bias increases with the number of observed signals. Also, one overweighs one&rsquo;s signal even when the signal is randomly assigned and of the same quality as others&rsquo;.	Ningning Cheng, Ernest Lai, Yi-Shan Lee and Feng Qin
d1_s01_rg	d1_s01_rg	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Networks & Contests	FEDERICA	ALBERTI	612298	University of Portsmouth	On the Relational Aspects of Trustworthiness: Results from a Laboratory Experiment	Do we trust better-connected people more than others? And are those who are better connected more trustworthy? We address these questions in a laboratory experiment in which trustors decide on how to allocate their endowment to five trustees. The allocation decision is made twice, both before and after a network formation phase during which all subjects can establish links with one another. Our results show that trustors are influenced by the behavior of trustees in the network formation game: when the allocation is chosen after networks have been formed, trust is directed towards better-connected trustees. However, such increased trust is not reciprocated by trustees: we find that returns to trust are lower when the trust game is played after network formation. Our results suggest that being well-connected in a network does not imply being more trustworthy outside it.	Federica Alberti, Daniela Di Cagno, Anna Conte, Emanuela Sciubba
d1_s01_rg	d1_s01_rg	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Networks & Contests	MORITZ	JANAS	444915	NYU Abu Dhabi	Social Ties Affect Preferences for Competition	We conduct a laboratory experiment to examine the causal effect of social ties on the preference for competition. Subjects have to decide whether or not to enter a competition. The potential competitors differ in the following dimensions between the four treatments: Whether they are known to the decision-maker via a previous chat, whether they will chat with the decision-maker after the competition stage, or neither or both. The data shows that the chat increases social closeness. Social closeness decreases the preference for competition in case one has to encounter each other again after the competition but has no effect on the probability to choose competition if subjects do not interact again afterward. Our results have implications for organizational economics as we identify previously undiscovered externalities of social-tie-influencing management practices such as team-building exercises or remote working options.	Enzo Brox, Moritz Janas, Baiba Renerte
d1_s01_rg	d1_s01_rg	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Networks & Contests	MATTHIAS	WEBER	d16354	UNIVERSITY OF ST. GALLEN AND SWISS FINANCE INSTITUTE	Fake News in Social Networks: Theory and Experiment	Fake news have become a topic of crucial societal importance. However, how fake news spread in social networks is still poorly understood. We model human behavior in a social network learning game with a machine-learning technique (neural-net reinforcement learning). An analysis of the model suggests that fake news spread more easily in clustered networks than in networks with more evenly distributed connections. Furthermore fake-news attacks that spread their efforts over more agents are more successful than attacks that concentrate their efforts on more thoroughly convincing fewer agents. To see whether the results hold when actual humans make the decisions, we test the comparative statics of the model in a human-subject laboratory experiment. The experiment lends support to the simulation results.	Christoph Aymanns, Jakob Foerster, Co-Pierre Georg, Matthias Weber
d1_s01_ri	d1_s01_ri	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	Current Topics in Political Economy	JORDAN	ADAMSON	298da0	LEIPZIG UNIVERSITY	A theory and experiment on how policing incentives affect crime, measurement, and justice	We develop a model and a virtual civilian-policing experiment where a police officer trades off investigating and patrolling in an environment where civilians choose between producing and stealing. The equilibrium numbers of criminals and producers, punished or not, are summarized in a truth table of criminal justice. Policing incentives affect all elements of the table. Theoretically, high-powered police incentives have non-monotone effects on crime, and can also increase both the clearance rate and false positives. Empirically, we find that stronger officer reprimands cause crime to increase and then decrease, civilian incomes to increase, and false positives to decrease. The clearance rate, however, is also decreasing with stronger reprimands, suggesting the police are performing better instead of worse.	Jordan Adamson and Lucas Rentschler
d1_s01_ri	d1_s01_ri	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	Current Topics in Political Economy	CLAUDIA	KESER	53468a	University of Göttingen	Policy Incentives and Determinants of Citizens’ COVID-19 Vaccination Motives	We present the results of a survey exploring the determinants of vacinees&rsquo; confidence in COVID-19 vaccines and their motivations to become vaccinated. At the threatening rise of the highly infectious Omicron variant, in December 2021, we interviewed people in waiting lines of vaccination centers. Our results identify risk-averse and social-distancing-compliant people as showing high confidence in the vaccine, which motivates them to receive it for reasons of protecting themselves and others. By contrast, policy incentives, such as &ldquo;3G/2G&rdquo; restrictions, motivate risk- tolerant people who opted for vaccination to get access to public areas. Trusting people who regularly vote are little afraid of vaccines&rsquo; side effects. Our findings offer insights for policymakers in societies and firms that help to tailor policies promoting vaccination based on people&rsquo;s economic preferences.	Claudia Keser,  Holger A. Rau‡
d1_s01_ri	d1_s01_ri	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	Current Topics in Political Economy	BORIS	GINZBURG	f136d5	Universidad Carlos III de Madrid	Guns, Pets, and Strikes: An Experiment on Identity and Political Action	We study the role of participation in political collective action in creating shared identity and shaping subsequent interpersonal interactions. In a laboratory experiment, we divide subjects into participants and non-participants by offering them a possibility to sign an online petition (at a low personal cost), or asking whether they had participated in recent street protests (at a high personal cost). Before and after this, we measure subjects' pro-social attitudes. We find that there is considerably more altruism, trust, and trustworthiness within a pair of subjects who participated in collective action than in any other pair of subjects. We also show that this reflects the experience of participation, rather than preexisting preferences. These results underscore the role of coordination in political collective action, and suggest a reason why individuals choose to participate despite private costs and a low probability of affecting the outcome: participation creates private benefits in subsequent interactions with fellow participants.	Boris Ginzburg, José-Alberto Guerra
d1_s01_ri	d1_s01_ri	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	Current Topics in Political Economy	TOPI	MIETTINEN	14765d	Hanken School of Economics and Helsinki GSE	Personal and societal conflict of redistributive principles and preferences	Income distributions across countries vary substantially, and within countries, preferences for redistribution vary across the population. Moreover, they are correlated with characteristics such as political views, personal income, and beliefs. Equality is a furiously debated topic in public and in these debates simple justice principles are evoked to motivate and solidify positions. From an academic perspective, the clearest expression of such principles applied to income distributions are so-called social choice axioms. Building on the methodology of Nielsen and Rehbeck (2022), we ask from a positive perspective: What kind of sets of basic distributive social choice axioms people subscribe to? Which principles do their distributive choices respect? And if these are in conflict, how do people resolve such a conflict? Additionally, we correlate the preferred sets of axioms, preferred distributive choices, and the resolutions of conflict with demographics, political orientations, and redistributive policy preferences. We propose a basic typography of disagreement in society and investigate whether societal conflict is more or less pronounced when people have resolved their personal conflicts. We also shed light on differences across demographic groups. Our findings offer insights that may facilitate to better understand the optimal elicitation of redistributive and policy preferences in empirical research.	Ola Andersson, Marco Lambrecht, Topi Miettinen
d1_s01_ri	d1_s01_ri	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	Current Topics in Political Economy	VINCENZO	PRETE	01715c	University of Palermo	Mobility evaluation: Theorerical definitions and people’s perceptions.	What is greater social mobility? How do people perceive social mobility? To answer the first question, we propose four intuitive definitions based on i) changes (swaps) in transition matrices, ii) Lorenz curve ordering, iii) welfare based orderings, and iv) Galton&rsquo;s regression coefficient. To address the second question, we conduct a questionnaire experiment consisting of ten pair-wise comparisons of alternative scenarios showing different levels of social mobility. We find that in most cases people&rsquo;s perceptions match theoretical predictions except in more complicated scenarios where &ldquo;pure&rdquo; exchange mobility is combined with structural mobility. Finally, mobility perceptions appear to be driven by personal mobility experience, while the value of independence in parents&rsquo; and children&rsquo;s outcomes does not seem to be a significant driver.	Michele Bernasconi, Giulio Cinquanta, Valentino Dardanoni
d1_s01_rl	d1_s01_rl	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Charitable Giving I	EGON	TRIPODI	47ffa5	University of Essex	Social Recognition: Experimental Evidence from Blood Donors	Does social recognition motivate repeat contributors? We conduct large-scale experiments among members of Italy&rsquo;s main blood donors association, testing social recognition both through social media and peer groups. We experimentally disentangle visibility concerns and peer comparisons, and we study how exposure to different norms of behavior affects giving. In an original study and two subsequent replications, we find that a simple ask to donate is at least as effective as asks that offer social recognition. A survey experiment with blood donors provides consistent evidence that social recognition backfires when offered to good citizens, as signaling focuses on image motivation. Our results warn against over-reliance on social recognition to promote good citizenship.	Lorenz Goette, Egon Tripodi
d1_s01_rl	d1_s01_rl	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Charitable Giving I	MATEJ	LORKO	1b2a8f	University of Economics in Bratislava	Intertemporal Coordination in Volunteer Markets	Research on altruism focuses on static conditions despite many contexts featuring dynamic spillovers that exacerbate the difficulties when coordinating supply and demand in the absence of prices. For example, providing voluntary help in one period often prohibits helping in a fixed number of subsequent periods (e.g., blood donation restrictions). We show that the intertemporal inability to help lowers market surplus compared to the static condition and study whether providing demand or supply information improves market outcomes. We find that in theory demand information causes higher market surplus in static than dynamic conditions, while supply information causes higher market surplus in dynamic than static conditions. Experimental results support almost all theoretical predictions and show that supply information especially improves market efficiency in dynamic conditions. The most critical takeaway is that comparative static inferences in static conditions do not carry over into dynamic conditions (and in this case are opposite).	Matej Lorko, Maroš Servátka, Robert Slonim & Michal Ďuriník
d1_s01_rl	d1_s01_rl	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Charitable Giving I	ESTEBAN	MUÑOZ	4198ff	Toulouse School of Economics	Holier-Than-Thou:  Competition Among Charitable Organizations. Theory and Evidence from the U.S	Charities actively engage in costly fundraising to collect the proceeds necessary to fund their activities. In this paper, I build a model that considers charities as potentially pro-social entities that compete for donations through informative advertising and may differ in terms of quality in a setting with atomistic donors that may value high-quality charities.  In equilibrium, advertising expenditures are excessive with respect to a welfare-maximizing benchmark. Moreover, this inefficiency is increasing in the amount of funds available in the market. The model yields three predictions: (i) increases in the deductibility rate of charitable donations should correlate positively with measures of intensity of competition between charities, (ii) equilibrium quality provision may be affected by such deductibility rate, depending on the extent to which donors value cost-effective charities (iii) normative estimates of the optimal deductibility rate that do not take into account the effect of competition need to be adjusted downwards. I use data from the IRS, Kantar Media, and Charity Navigator to estimate a structural model of competition to assess (i) and (ii) and provide appropriate estimates on (iii) for the US. At last, this setting allows testing relevant predictions obtained by \cite{dewatripont2020morality} for environments with pro-socially motivated suppliers. Preliminary results suggest that ethical NGOs (as measured by their Charity Navigator score) command higher market shares, suggesting that donors have preferences for high-quality NGOs, which means that result (i) is dampened by the response of pro-social NGOs implied by result (ii).	Esteban Muñoz
d1_s01_rl	d1_s01_rl	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Charitable Giving I	PATRIZIA	SBRIGLIA	a037a2	department of economics university of Campania-Luigi Vanvitelli	Organised Crime Makes You Lie Hastily. Evidence from an on-line experiment	We investigate experimentally whether exposure to a context plagued by organised crime violence induces people to misreport private information as an instinctive re- sponse. We implement a standard coin ipping task repeated for 30 times, and measure participants' response times to identify hasty and thoughtful types of subjects. Our findings support the hypothesis that living in a context plagued by organised crime violence induces a prevalence of hasty subjects who lie as an instinctive response. We record a higher degree of randomness in the decisions of hasty subjects compared to the thoughtful ones, indicating that exposure to a criminal context might limit individuals' ability to correctly figure out the incentives of the decision problem at hand.	A.Conte, P. Sbriglia, M. Stimolo
d1_s01_rl	d1_s01_rl	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Charitable Giving I	LUCA	CORAZZINI	ad35db	University of Venice	Heterogeneous Agents in Threshold Public Goods Experiments: How Donors Focus on the Recipients Favored by the Wealthy	Experiments involving multiple public goods with contribution thresholds capture many features of charitable giving environments. We present results from a laboratory experiment that introduces endowment and preference differences into such a framework to explore the impact of donor heterogeneity on public good success and payoffs. We observe that donors tend to focus on the recipients preferred by the wealthiest contributors, ignoring other potential alternatives. This effect can reduce inequality within donor communities that succeed in funding a public good; however, it also affects the philanthropic agenda, reducing the variety of public goods that receive funding.	Luca Corazzini, Christopher Cotton, Enrico Longo, Tommaso Reggiani
d1_s01_rm	d1_s01_rm	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Markets & Finance	IVÁN	BARREDA-TARRAZONA	dfb768	Universitat Jaume I	Can bank runs be prevented? An experimental analysis of stability funds and deposit insurance mechanisms	Past instances of financial crises have emphasized the need to set up institutional devices to prevent bank runs. We set up an experiment to study the effectiveness of two of such devices: Stability funds that automatically limit depositors' possibility of withdrawing their assets, and individual insurance against the risk of default. We also vary the coverage that either mechanism permits. Depositors start off with all their monetary endowment deposited in a bank. They then have three rounds in which they can withdraw money, before and after the bank suffers a liquidity shock that can be either permanent or temporary. The bank defaults if the desired withdrawals exceed its available liquidity. We find that the only mechanism that is effective in reducing bank defaults compared to baseline is the stability fund with high coverage. Bank runs are less likely in groups with a higher share of female depositors.	Iván Barreda-Tarrazona, Gianluca Grimalda, Patrick Ring and Andrea Teglio
d1_s01_rm	d1_s01_rm	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Markets & Finance	MARCO	LAMBRECHT	a284ef	Helsinki GSE & Hanken School of Economics	An experiment on robo-advising	Robo-advisors are a novel tool in financial markets that provide traders with financial advice and offer asset management based on algorithms. Such algorithms consider individual characteristics of traders when assisting in financial decision making. While there is some work examining regulation of robo-advisors, relatively little is known of the consequences they may have on the behaviour of traders. In this study, we particularly focus on i) the characteristics of robo-advisors that lead to adaptation, ii) characteristics of participants who take up these new financial tools and iii) how robo-advisors influence behaviour of individual traders and shape financial markets in general. To this end, we elicit characteristics of subjects and invite them to join an experimental financial market running over 10 weeks. In each week, subjects choose how to invest into different assets which vary with respect to their relative risk and return. Subjects either have access to robo advice, may delegate all decision to the algorithm, or trade on their own. Decisions of the algorithm and the nature of advice depend on the characteristics we previously elicited. We find that initial market participation is the highest when the algorithm offers advice but does not make decisions. We complement this observation with analysis of prolonged market participation and optimality of investment. We are confident that appreciating the factors that lead to adoption of robo-advisors and shedding light on implications for risk taking and consumer welfare constitute a valuable contribution towards understanding these novel financial tools.	Marco Lambrecht, Jörg Oechssler, Simon Weidenholzer
d1_s01_rm	d1_s01_rm	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Markets & Finance	FABIAN	BRAUN	0c4150	LEIBNIZ INSTITUTE SAFE FRANKFURT & JOHANNES GUTENBERG UNIVERSITY MAINZ	How to Influence Socially Responsible Investments -  The Role of Preferences, Incentives and Information	To understand how socially responsible investments (SRI) can be influenced, we introduce an incentivized online stock market game and study the role of preferences, incentives and information. We provide causal evidence on three different channels that influence SRI. (1) We show that information on the risk adjusted overperformance (underperformance) of high sustainability firms increase (decrease) SRI. (2) We demonstrate a significant effect of monetary incentives on sustainable investments. (3) Our results suggest that (perceived) financial incentives skew information acquisition on the moral advantages of SRI, which alters subsequent investment choices. Finally, we analyze the role of different motives to invest sustainable. Our study shows that warm glow and pure altruism are predictors for SRI and the willingness to pay for sustainability information. Our findings help governments and private companies to develop initiatives to increase SRI and suggest to follow a combined approach of financial incentives and information on the advantages of sustainable investments.	Braun, Fabian; Gill, Andrej; Hett, Florian
d1_s01_rm	d1_s01_rm	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Markets & Finance	XIAOYU	ZHOU	57502d	Chair of Economic Theory, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg	Information aggregation over separated markets. An experiment	Experiments find that Arrow-Debreu markets can aggregate diverse information well when traders interact in the same market (e.g., Plott and Sunder, 1988; Plott, 2000; Choo et al., 2019). However, developments in finance suggest that traders can sometimes be excluded from certain market interactions. Prominent examples include &ldquo;dark pools&rdquo; and over-the-counter (OTC) markets. The above examples can be characterised by distinct separated markets where traders in each market are only able to participate and observe the activities in their respective markets. Nev- ertheless, the separated markets are sometimes &ldquo;connected&rdquo; by intermediaries (e.g., large financial institutions) who are endowed with the unique opportunity to trade and arbitrage across the different markets. These intermediaries can help promote market liquidity (e.g., Allen and Santomero, 2001), and through their activities, potentially facilitate the transfer of information from one market to another. This raises pertinent question as to the information transmission over the separated markets. Against this backdrop, this paper investigates the information aggrega- tion properties of Arrow-Debreu markets over separated markets. 	Lawrence Choo,  Todd R. Kaplan, Xiaoyu Zhou
d1_s01_rm	d1_s01_rm	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Markets & Finance	ENRICA	CARBONE	ddd57e	Università della Campania "Luigi Vanvitelli"	Information in Asset Market Experiment with Bot	This paper proposes an experimental asset market in which human traders interact with a robot trader, with the aim of evaluating the effect on transactions price behavior, of random arrival of good news or bad news on fundamentals.<br><br><br>The experimental design considers a continuous double-auction market based on Smith at al. (SSW, 1988), in which human agents exchange securities manually, but they interact with a robot trader, which uses an algorithm to exchange securities between markets.<br><br><br>The experiment aims to reproduce the main strategy adopted by high-frequency algorithmic traders in real markets to obtain profits, that is, an arbitrage strategy between markets. For this reason we resumed the structure of Angerer, Neugebauer and Shachat (2019), implementing an arbitrage strategy but evaluating the impact of market news, in presence of the robot traders, on the assets price discovery.<br><br><br>Based on the experimental literature on learning mechanisms in financial markets, for example Khunen (2015), we expect asymmetries in transactions price behavior, in presence of good news compared to the presence of bad news on fundamentals. In particular, we expect, as in Weber and Welfens (working paper 2007), a price drift and an underreaction of the transaction price. We expect this effect to be mitigated by the presence of the arbitrage robot traders.<br><br><br>The experimental design provides the trading of two related assets in two separate markets. The presence of two related assets, is justified by the need to create arbitrage opportunities for robot traders. There is a type X asset that pays stochastic dividends and an asset Y that pays stochastic dividends equal to X + 50 units.<br><br><br>The experimental design is organized according to a random lottery in which each node is a random node. The news create a positive or negative shock in the market that enter in a particular state of the world. We have two states of the world in the second period : one bearish, the orange one and the other bullish, the green one. In the third period we have three states of the world identified by the colors red, yellow and blue.<br><br><br>There are 4 treatments: two treatments in which there is a robot traders (01 and 11) and two control treatments in which there is no robot trader (00 and 10).<br><br><br>We also want to evaluate the announcement effect, so there are two treatments with the announcement of the presence in the market of the robot (10 and 11) and two controls treatments without announcement (0 and 1).<br><br><br>Each experimental session consists of 10 rounds of 9 minute and each round has 3 trading periods of 3 minutes, for a total of 90 minutes per session. During the second and third trading period, the news is communicated to the participants with a colored box that indicates the state of the world in which trading is. In each treatment, participants have to trade twice, in every state of the world.<br>It is important to note, that as in other papers, the shock is communicated to the market after the first trading period. This choice allows to obtain endogenous endowments before the shock, so these endowments are not influenced by the researchers but they depend by the allocations in the first period generated by the participants' individual risk attitude. This choice allows you to observe transactions after shock not influenced by researchers.<br>To evaluate the market price behavior we used the DF ( Deviation from Fundamental ), calculated as the transaction price on the fundamental value, minus one. The DF can have positive or negative values, it is influenced by the risk attitude of participants and as it is shown in Charness and Neugebauer (2019), if it has a positive value, it means that the transaction price is greater than the fundamental value, so we have a negative market risk premium and vice versa.<br>From ours first results, we observe that in the treatments in which there is a robot, the average prices of the transactions are closer to the fundamentals since the first trading periods and we observe a positive average DF, so the premium for market risk depend by a less risk aversion. However, the test results show a small but not significant p value . (see the type of test conducted).<br>We observed an underreaction of the transactions price, in particular, in presence of good news, the average transactions price was below the fundamental value while, in presence of bad news, the average transactions price was above the fundamental value. The effect was evident in trading<br>rounds where bad news in one period was followed by good news in the following period and in trading rounds where good news in one period was followed by a bad news in the following period, compared to the rounds in which there were two consecutive bad or good news.<br><br><br>In our design participants have to trade twice in each state of the world, so we observed the behavior of the DF in the transition between two consecutive states of the world in the two repetitions.<br>We observe that in both repetitions in the presence of positive shocks, the DF decreases and tends to negative values, so the market prices contain a positive market risk premium , reflecting an increase of participants risk aversion.<br>On the other hand, we observe that in both repetitions in the presence of negative shock, the DF increases and tends to positive values, so market prices contain a negative premium market risk premium, reflecting an increase in risk attitude. These results are confirmed by econometric tests. We assume that these results may depend by the disposition effect, which has been observed several times in literature. Subjects tend to sell securities with profits and to hold securities with loss. This effect is explained by the value function of prospect theory and by the mental accounting.<br>In our sessions and we observe the price drift and the under-reaction. Average prices remain below the fundamentals for good news and above the fundamentals for bad news. We are still in a preliminary analysis, so we have to conduct other tests to evaluate the price drift and the spillover effect between the final transaction price level in one period and the initial transaction price level in the following period.<br>Finally unlike Farjam and Kirchkamp, we have not observed any announcement effects.	Enrica Carbone Tibor Neugebauer Angelo Ventrone
d1_s01_rq	d1_s01_rq	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Voting and Redistribution	ALI SEYHUN	SARAL	c851e0	University of Bologna	Wisdom of crowds under social influence: A comparison of voting rules	People often vote to find the best outcome when their interests align, but their opinions differ. This type of voting is common for juries, teams, online platforms, and communities. It is shown that the aggregation of opinions can lead to accurate outcomes &mdash;leading to the wisdom of crowds&mdash;, although social influence can help or hinder this process. Different voting rules might affect this process, not just by how they aggregate information but also by how they collect and present information from those who voted previously. In this study, we computationally and experimentally investigate some common voting rules about how they perform on aggregating opinions when there are underlying true values of outcomes, but they are not perfectly observable. We compare the plurality rule, approval voting,  upvote/downvote scheme, and Borda rule on how successful they are in finding the best outcome with and without information from previous voters.	Ali Seyhun Saral, Annika Hennes
d1_s01_rq	d1_s01_rq	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Voting and Redistribution	THIBAULT	RICHARD	9b8711	ENS Paris-Saclay	The populist gamble: uncertainty preferences and attitude toward right-wing populism	While it is generally known that political decisions always generate uncertain outcomes, no previous work attempts to link revealed uncertainty preferences to political attitudes. We test this relationship on a large-scale Dutch panel, and we reveal that risk aversion has a significant and negative impact on the self-stated adherence to right-wing populism. According to our estimates, a large increase in risk aversion has the same effect on the attitude toward right-wing populism as having a college degree. The rich set of variables in our data enables us to check the robustness of our results by including a wide range of possible confounding factors, such as incomes, personality traits, ambiguity attitudes or other political beliefs. Methodologically, this paper also appears to be the first to use Bayesian statistics to deal with measurement issues in the field of decision under risk.	Thibault RICHARD
d1_s01_rq	d1_s01_rq	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Voting and Redistribution	RALPH-CHRISTOPHER	BAYER	5fbaeb	University of Adelaide	How Wise is the Crowd? - An Internet Experiment on Uninformed Voting During the Presidential Election	We use a large pre-registered internet experiment during the US presidential election to investigate the phenomenon of uninformed voting and its potential threat to the efficiency of large election in aggregating information. We develop an environment where voters initially are uninformed about which of two alternatives yields a better outcome for the electorate if implemented. Then voters decide to either vote without information acquire a signal at a randomly drawn cost or to abstain. We show that in equilibrium nobody should ever vote without information. Instead voters who draw an information cost below a certain threshold should buy a signal and should vote accordingly, while the others should abstain. Despite the finding that the threshold for abstention decreases with the size of the electorate, larger elections in equilibrium are still more efficient as the probability of the better alternative being implemented converges to one as the size of the electorate grows.   We implemented this environment in an internet experiment with 3600 Amazon Turk workers. For this we varied the electorate size and the motivation for uninformed voting. Electorate sizes were 1, 10 or 200, where N=1 was used as a rationality benchmark. For each size we had three conditions. In the Base condition, a neutral virtual coin with the two sides showing a circle or a square, which of both alternatives yielded a payout for the electorate if implemented. In our second condition allowing for Expressive voting motives the two side of the coin showed Donald Trumps face, one side overlayed with a thick red cross and the text &ldquo;Ban Trump&rdquo;, the other without the cross and with the text &ldquo;Go Trump.&rdquo; In the third condition we induced biased beliefs but returned to the neutral square-circle coins. By making the coin toss that followed 7 straight circles the decider we utilized to law of small numbers to make some voters belief that the knew which alternative was more likely despite the fact that they did not.    We find that uninformed voting is alarmingly frequent. In the voting environments of N=10 and N=200 between 42% (base, N=10) and 57% (expressive, N=10) voted without information. Adding motives for uniformed voting such as expressive voting or overconfidence significantly increased the fraction of uniformed voters. Surprisingly, the electorate size had no significant impact on individual voting behaviour. Even the fraction of voters who purchased information did not vary across N=10 and N=200. Using individual behaviour to estimate the impact of the environment and the information cost allowed us to simulate 10,000 elections for each treatment and calculate the efficiency level. In both the base and in the expressive condition moving from N=10 to N=200 improves efficiency considerably (base 63% to 92%, expressive 60% to 81%), while in the overconfidence treatment efficiency falls below 50 %, the level a random implementation would have achiever (56% to 48%). We conclude that uninformed voting threatens the wisdom of the crow only if uninformed voters concentrate on one candidate, as they do in the overconfidence treatment.	Ralph-C Bayer, Marco Faravelli and Carlos Pimienta
d1_s01_rq	d1_s01_rq	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Voting and Redistribution	ANDREAS	MUELLER	736e6f	University of Essex	The Dynamics of Social Identity, Inequality and Redistribution	We provide a politico-economic theory of income redistribution with endogenous social identity. Voters are heterogeneous with respect to earnings and have standard materialistic payoffs from private and public consumption. Motivated by social identity theory, we also assume that they are altruistic toward their social identity group. Importantly, social identity is a discrete optimal choice between identifying with all other voters (universal altruism) and identifying with the own income group only (in-group altruism). Each social identity comes with an affective factor, the group's average consumption, and a centrality factor, how close the voter&rsquo;s consumption is to the group's average. In the political equilibrium the income tax rate and social identity are determined simultaneously. We characterise the comparative statics with respect to first-order (FSD) and mean-preserving second-order stochastic dominance (SSD) shifts in the wage distribution. We show that the equilibrium tax rate is lower after a FSD and higher after a mean-preserving SSD shift in the wage distribution. Moreover, endogenous social identity reinforces the decrease in the equilibrium tax rate caused by FSD shifts. We also show that the change in the share of universal altruists depends on whether the FSD shift is regressive (yielding less universal altruists) or progressive (yielding more universal altruists) around the social identification threshold.  Our theory can explain the redistribution divide between the US and Europe, while also being consistent with survey evidence that rich American voters tend to be less other-regarding toward the poor than rich Europeans.	Christian Ghiglino (University of Essex) and Andreas Mueller (University of Essex)
d1_s01_rq	d1_s01_rq	1 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Voting and Redistribution	ROBERTO	WEBER	fd954d	University of Zurich	Preferences for the allocation of production rewards  between capital and labor	The allocation of production rewards between capital and labor has long been of interest to economists. Recently, rising capital shares and inequality have renewed interest in this topic. We use pre-registered experiments with representative samples of the US and the Swiss populations to study perceptions of fairness in the allocation of rewards to capital and labor. Our design holds constant many factors that may influence individuals&rsquo; policy preferences over such allocations. In the experiment, two participants provide separate inputs to production, either in the form of monetary investment or work effort. A different participant allocates the production rewards between the investor and the worker. While we find substantial heterogeneity in the perceived fair shares, we also observe a tendency to allocate a greater share to labor than to capital. We further find that our measure of the tendency to favor one input over the other predicts attitudes towards policies that differentially reward capital and labor. Overall, our findings indicate that people perceive some input factors as more deserving than others and that such fairness views matter for policy preferences.	Florian H. Schneider&#9;, Vanessa Valero, Roberto A. Weber
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	GABRIEL	VOLLERT	02e3fe	Technical University Munich	Preferences for Redistribution and Social Mobility: The Role of Motivated Beliefs	People who believe to live in a society with high social mobility generally prefer significantly less redistribution. However, people hold highly inaccurate beliefs about the amount of social mobility. A plausible reason why these beliefs are so inaccurate is that people do not only form beliefs with the intention to maximize accuracy, but rather they might also hold motivated beliefs. With our study we aim to understand (i) whether people hold motivated beliefs with regards to social mobility and, if they do, (ii) which kinds of motivated beliefs are most important in influencing their redistribution preferences. In an online experiment, we focus on two types of motivated beliefs about social mobility: Overconfidence with respect to one's ability to outwork others and "justifying beliefs" i.e. the beliefs one holds about social mobility in order to justify a preferred redistribution demand. Between treatments we vary (i) the room for overconfidence and justifying beliefs and (ii) the amount of effort-based social mobility. While the former variation allows us to study the existence of motivated beliefs about social mobility, the latter variation is informative about the impact of effort dependence on the formation of such beliefs.	Michael Kurschilgen, Gabriel Vollert
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	JIERUI	YANG	929a2b	Tilburg University	Hot vs Cold reciprocity	Many economic and social interactions involve trust and reciprocation (e.g. employeremployee, buyer-seller, borrower-lender). It is well-known that at least some people are trustworthy: they are willing to reciprocate if their partner trusts them, even when reciprocation comes at a substantial monetary cost. Not much is known, however, about the effect of the cost of trusting for the partner's reciprocation: are people more inclined to reciprocate trust, the higher the amount that the partner leaves on the table by trusting, that is, the &lsquo;better&rsquo; is the outside option? We study this question by designing laboratory experiments in which participants play trust games that vary in terms of the outside option.	Jierui Yang
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	XAVIER	GASSMANN	1faa94	Burgundy School of Business	Preferences After Pan(dem)ics:   Time and risk in the shadow of Covid-19	This paper uses the Covid-19 health crisis to study how individual preferences respond to generalized traumatic events. We review previous literature on natural and man-made disasters. Using incentive-compatible tasks, we simultaneously estimate risk and ambiguity aversion, time discounting, present bias, and prudence parameters before, during, and after the Covid-19 lockdown in France. We find patience, risk aversion, and ambiguity aversion fell during lockdown, then gradually returned toward their initial levels 4 months later. These results have implications for health and economic policies, and deepen our understanding of the responses &ndash; and resilience &ndash; of economic preferences to traumatic events.	Xavier Gassmann, Antoine Malézieux, Eli Spiegelman, Jean-Christian Tisserand
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	CEREN	AY	67dd8b	Telenor Research and Norwegian School of Economics-FAIR	Strategic Ignorance and Privacy—Would entertaining content trigger information avoidance?	Growing research on information preferences has established a strategic motive for avoidance: people may avoid information when receiving it can refrain them from some actions or make them feel worse about themselves or the consequences of their actions. In this study, we investigate information preferences in the context of privacy information by varying the content of online entertainment. We study to what extent people who are watching videos would choose to read a privacy notice, and how this might differ given the content and the level of entertainment of the videos they are watching. We use a two-by-two design in which the treatments vary along two dimensions; the video&rsquo;s content, either entertaining or normal, and the minimum time indicated that it would take to the read the privacy notice, either 10 or 30 seconds. By introducing the variation in the pre-tested and calculated entertainment level of videos, we aim to analyze information preferences about privacy depending on how engaged and entertained the participants are. By introducing the time variation, we aim to limit the effects of time preferences in the choice of reading the privacy notice. Across the four treatment groups, we measure the likelihood of avoiding privacy information, as well as the actual time that participants spend on the different elements of privacy information throughout the task. Our preliminary results show that watching entertaining videos increases the level of information avoidance.	Eleonora Freddi, Ole Christian Wasenden
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	RENATA	KOSÍKOVÁ	b96f75	Masaryk University	Value of time in a repeated and one-off setup	The value of time (VOT) is important not only for determining productivity, income inequality measurements, and relative prices of services and goods but also for the correct compensation of research subjects. In transport economics, the VOT is an essential input for appraisals of transport investments and policies. The VOT is frequently estimated from transport choices, which are typically made in short-term or one-off contexts, such as route or mode choice. There is less evidence about the value of time in the long-term or repeated settings. We conducted a laboratory experiment which measures whether participants request the same compensation in exchange for one-off or repeated waiting. The waiting time was scheduled at the end of practice sessions in a large microeconomic course. We used multiple price lists to elicit the VOT students who were willing to accept a 10-minute wait. In the repeated treatment, students were offered compensation for waiting once a week for several weeks of the semester. In the one-off treatment, they could wait only one randomly selected week. We find no significant difference between the repeated treatment treatments: our subjects requested the same minimum compensation for the one-off or repeated waiting. The values measured in a one-off setup, therefore, seem to be valid also in a repeated setting.	Renata Kosíková, Ondřej Krčál, Stefanie Peer
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	CHRISTIAN	KÖNIG GENANNT KERSTING	7b17e2	University of Innsbruck	Grit, Discounting, & Time Inconsistency	We study the association of the perseverance-of-effort (PoE) and the consistency-of-interests (CoI) components of the psychological measure of grit, with economic measures of impatience and decreasing impatience (time inconsistency), respectively, in a sample of more than 3000 members of the Dutch general population. We find that impatience is associated with grit through the PoE component. No association of time inconsistency with grit is found. Predicting participants&rsquo; financial and health outcomes and behaviors, we find that, despite their correlation, both impatience and grit are predictive for both outcomes, but this is not the case for time inconsistency. Our findings suggest that it may be beneficial for empirical studies of intertemporal decisions to include both economic impatience and psychological grit measures.	Christian König-Kersting; Stefan T. Trautmann
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	SILVIA	ANGERER	bbae65	UMIT TIROL	The effect of social norms on COVID-19 vaccination readiness	Even though, vaccinating is the most promising strategy to end the current pandemic, many countries still face high refusal rates of COVID-19 vaccinations. Consequently, policy makers are looking for (non-coercive) ways to increase vaccination readiness. From an economics perspective, a potentially powerful tool to foster vaccination readiness are social norms, as they govern a wide range of behavior, but are often misperceived by a non-negligible part of society. In this paper, we test if people misperceive the social norm to get vaccinated, and whether correcting these misperceptions influences vaccination readiness. We conducted a two-stage information-provision-experiment in Germany, where we elicited social norms in the first survey (N1 = 2,030) and use the descriptive norm as information in the second survey (N2 = 3,045). We find strong associations between perceived social norms and vaccination readiness. Furthermore, we find that correcting misperceptions about the social norm strongly affects norm-beliefs. However, we do not find evidence that these changes in beliefs translate to changes in vaccination readiness.	Silvia Angerer, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Philipp Lergetporer, Thomas Rittmannsberger
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	CLAIRE	CULLEN	e945ae	University of Oxford	Empowering girls: A randomized trial on mHealth ‘safe spaces’ during COVID-19	In spite of their promise, there is limited evidence that mobile-phone-based adolescent girls ‘safe space’ and sexual and reproductive health interventions have improved wellbeing and health outcomes in developing countries. The existing causal evidence on mHealth programs for women and girls has focused on text message or interactive voice response programs, and often shows limited impact, or even negative effects (Zurovac et al., 2011; Jamison et al, 2013, L’Engle et al., 2016; Iribarren et al., 2017; Berendes et al., 2021). We study, using a randomised controlled trial, the effect of a weekly SMS and phone-call-based ‘safe space’ or big brothers/big sisters-type program. It provided adolescents with information about HIV risk and sexual and reproductive health and support services. Over 1,000 adolescents in Botswana were randomly assigned to control or treatment groups during COVID-19 school disruptions. Using school administrative data, we find that the program reduced school dropouts and pregnancy six months after program end. Using phone surveys, we also find that the program increased adolescents’ knowledge, willingness to disclose sensitive experiences including gender-based violence, and improved intended health behaviors and girls’ self-reported empowerment. 	Noam Angrist, Efua Bortsie, Lorato Gaolebe, Amy Jung, Bogadi Mothlobogwa
d1_s03_ra	d1_s03_ra	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room A	Lightning I	CHRISTOPH	HUBER	28d3b2	Vienna University of Economics and Business	Competitiveness and Speculative Behavior	Financial markets are inherently competitive and populated by market participants with an exceptional willingness to compete and comparatively high cognitive sophistication. In a laboratory experiment with five treatments, we investigate whether individual willingness to compete together with common knowledge about others' willingness to compete, as well as individual numeracy skills, as a proxy for cognitive sophistication, together with common knowledge about others' numeracy skills, can act as determinants of speculation and results in market inefficiencies (bubbles). Our results show that this is not the case: being smart among a group of other smart participants has no effect on speculation; being competitive among a group of other competitive participants even decreases the average level of speculation, while individual ability and willingness to compete seem to have no effect on speculative behavior.	Christoph Huber
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	ANGELA	SUTAN	0abd20	Burgundy School of Business	Cooperative norms and norms in cooperatives	Cooperatives are institutions based on principles that depart fundamentally from those of privately controlled (i.e., capitalist) firms. The integration of social goals into their functioning and governance leads many to see them as the solution to sustainability, fair distribution, and efficient allocation. But as in other organizations, internal cooperation may not be guaranteed. Those who feel compelled to participate have been described as reluctant: they participate, but lack of intrinsic commitment can lead them to seek loopholes or engage in self-serving reasoning to avoid full compliance with wider social goals; opportunistic behaviors then can still trouble the collective project. Moreover, regardless of whether their doubt is justified, external observers may not trust that cooperative principles are really endorsed by members. This paper studies these issues with laboratory and lab-in-the-field experiments. Based on interviews and pilots with cooperative members, we adapt a standard linear public goods game to isolate the behavioral influence of seven basic principles undergirding cooperative projects. To see whether the effects are specific to cooperatives or more generally applicable to different kinds of organization, we implement choice frames of a cooperative, a general business enterprise, and an unframed &ldquo;group&rdquo;. Because cooperatives are fundamentally social structures, and therefore likely rely on norms for their effectiveness, we also apply a Keynesian &ldquo;beauty contest&rdquo; procedure to test the extent to which expectations of others&rsquo; behavior influences cooperation. &rsquo;Our main results show that, when compared to other groups, individuals in a cooperative frame contribute more. Nevertheless, in the lab, cooperative members have no strict preferences for treatments meant to induce more cooperation. In the field, wine producers engage in effective redistribution public goods, while their business partners fail to anticipate it.	Xavier Hollandts, François Cochard, Eli Spiegelman, Angela Sutan
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	JOHANNES	LEUTGEB	84d4d9	WZB	Learning Through Period and Physical Time	We document, using a laboratory experiment, that strategic learning with high-frequency interaction depends on two aspects of time -- period time (the number of stage games that have elapsed) and physical time (the conventional "clock" time that has elapsed). The extensive literature on strategic learning has so far only considered period time, modeling agents as learning from interactions in past periods to make decisions in the current period using a variety of learning rules. We show that this approach to time may be sufficient for understanding learning in some circumstances but that in others a full account of subjects' learning requires the additional consideration of physical time.	Teresa Backhaus, Steffen Huck, Johannes Leutgeb, Ryan Oprea
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	RICCARDO	GHIDONI	1d7383	UNIVERSITY OF BOLOGNA	Governing climate geoengineering: Side-payments are not enough	Climate geoengineering strategies might reduce the economic and ecological impacts of global warming. However, governing geoengineering is challenging: since climate preferences vary across countries, excessive deployment relative to the socially optimal level is a likely risk. Through a laboratory experiment on a public good-or-bad game, we study to which extent side-payments can curb over-deployment and restore efficiency. Although side-payments are theoretically effective, their impact in the experiment is modest, especially in a multilateral setup. Replacing unstructured bilateral agreements with a treaty framework simplifies the action space and performs moderately better.	Riccardo Ghidoni, Anna Lou Abatayo, Valentina Bosetti, Marco Casari, Massimo Tavoni
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	MARCO	PELLICCIA	684a83	Heriot-Watt University	Inducing Optimal Diffusion	Influence maximization is a relevant problem in many fields, from marketing to development economics, public health, and computer science. A decision-maker (the designer) optimally targets a subset of agents with a message. The goal is to maximize the diffusion of the message across the population by peers sharing it via word-of-mouth. Two assumptions are commonly made in these models. Networks are usually fixed and, at least partially, known to a designer, and the probability of a message being passed between two peers is independent and homogeneous across individuals. Most of the literature discusses various algorithms that are able to efficiently select, given a specific model setting, the optimal subset of individuals to target. In this paper, we study the same problem but approach it differently. Instead of exploiting an existing social network, we study a way to incentivize individuals to diffuse the message efficiently by possibly forming communication links between themselves. Individuals differ in their ability to successfully pass a message (their type) and this is onlyalocalknowledge&ndash;unobserved by the designer. We propose a direct mechanism expected to induce agents to both (i) report their own true type to the designer and (ii) communicate the message to other peers efficiently as equilibrium &ndash; building a communication structure that maximizes the expected diffusion of the message. By inducing the formation of an efficient communication structure, we avoid one of the common challenges faced by this literature represented by the often noisy information we have about existing social network structures. Moreover, we exploit possible differences in types in order to diffuse the message efficiently instead of relying on simplifying assumptions over types. In the mechanism, players are initially asked to report their own type. The designer then uses this information to compute the communication structure that maximizes the diffusion of a message (optimal), to seed a subset of players, and finally instruct agents to pass the message to other peers optimally. As a final step, the designer allocates transfers to the players. It is clear that a player can deviate in two different ways under such a mechanism. She could misreport her own type (adverse selection) and/or she might not comply with the instructions relative to the formation of communication links (moral hazard). We show that our mechanism induces an equilibrium where individuals form optimal communication links and report their own types truthfully.	Marco Pelliccia and Arupratan Daripa
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	ADAM	ZYLBERSZTEJN	79a001	University of Lyon, GATE CNRS	Measuring strategic-uncertainty attitudes	Strategic uncertainty is the uncertainty that players face with respect to the purposeful behavior of other players in an interactive decision situation. Our paper develops a new method for measuring strategic-uncertainty attitudes and distinguishing them from risk and ambiguity attitudes. We vary the source of uncertainty (whether strategic or not) across conditions in a ceteris paribus manner. We elicit certainty equivalents of participating in two strategic 2x2 games (a stag-hunt and a market-entry game) as well as certainty equivalents of related lotteries that yield the same possible payoffs with exogenously given probabilities (risk) and lotteries with unknown probabilities (ambiguity). We provide a structural model of uncertainty attitudes that allows us to measure a preference for or an aversion against the source of uncertainty, as well as optimism or pessimism regarding the desired outcome. We document systematic attitudes towards strategic uncertainty that vary across contexts. Under strategic complementarity [substitutability], the majority of participants tend to be pessimistic [optimistic] regarding the desired outcome. However, preferences for the source of uncertainty are distributed around zero. 	L. Bruttel, M. Bulutay, C. Cornand, F. Heinemann, A. Zylbersztejn
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	ALJAZ	ULE	ca01dd	CREED, Amsterdam School of Economics	Reasoning in Games: Incentivising Qualitative Evidence on Focal Points	We report experiments evaluating possible modes of reasoning in coordination games, by giving incentives to provide sound advice. Subjects play coordination games then advise another subject how to play similar games. They are rewarded for their advisee&rsquo;s performance. They choose from a list of advice representing the different modes of reasoning proposed in coordination game literature, and can then write their own advice. The advice most often selected represents Team Reasoning, followed by Cognitive Hierarchy Theory. Advice given or received does not obviously explain choices, however.	Nicholas Bardsley, Rachel McCloy, Simone Pfuderer and Aljaž Ule
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	KJELL ARNE	BREKKE	cf5500	University of Oslo	Voluntary contributions to an alternating-offer bargaining: Hold-up problem in the lab	A two-stage game is designed to study how the bargaining outcome is influenced by relation specific contributions. With two parties investing in a joint project and sharing the profit though bargaining, the investment would be sunk cost at the bargaining stage and hence not affect bargaining strength. If bargaining outcome is independent of contributions, this creates a hold-up problem causing underinvestment.  There are however several reason why the bargaining outcome could dependent on contributions, this could be due to fairness consideration, reference points and loss aversion. In this paper we argue that the bargaining outcome do depend on contribution, and sufficiently so to turn the hold-up problem into an coordination game, in many cases. We first estimate parameters in a model with reference points and loss aversion, and show that full contribution could potentially be an equilibrium. We then revert to a linear model without any explicit theory, but where we also can include the cost of bargaining. We find not only that subject get a share of the pie that increases in their share of the contribution, but also that disagreement and hence negotiation cost is increasing in the inequality of contribution. This create a double incentive to contribute for the one with the lowest contributions: by increasing contributions they both get a larger share of the pie but also reduces the bargaining cost. This creates multiple equilibria for many parameter values, including an equilibrium with full contribution. One potential reason why negotiation cost increase in inequality is self-serving biases. We test for this by studying how opening demand, and find a tendency that the lower contributor ask for an equal split while the higher contributor ask for a proportional split, consistent with the theory of self-serving principles of justice.  	Alice Ciccone ∗ and Kjell Arne Brekke
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	SANDER	ONDERSTAL	234b6a	University of Amsterdam	Anchoring in ultimatum bargaining: The effects of competition and granularity	Anchoring is a well-studied phenomenon according to which economic behavior depends on irrelevant numerical information. In the economics literature, anchoring effects have been identified in the context of bilateral bargaining and auctions in that first movers benefit from the opportunity to send numerical cheap-talk messages to parties at the other side of the market. Recent literature in marketing and consumer psychology shows that in bilateral bargaining, round initial price requests lead to outcomes that are further away from the anchor than granular initial offers. Using a laboratory experiment, we explore the effects of competition and the level and the granularity of a seller's request on buyers' offers in ultimatum bargaining in a setting with incomplete information on both sides of the market. We study the effect of competition by letting buyers and sellers interact in bilateral bargaining, in which each seller interacts with a single buyer, and in auctions, in which the seller interacts with two buyers. Our main findings are the following: (i) The seller's request contains information about the production costs; (ii) The level of the request has a positive effect on the offer in both bilateral bargaining and the auction; (iii) The request's granularity influences the granularity of the offer; (iv) The request's granularity does not influence the level of the offer; (v) The anchoring effect is weaker in the auction than in bilateral bargaining.	Sander Onderstal, Shaul Shalvi, and Ivan Soraperra
d1_s03_rb	d1_s03_rb	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room B	Lightning II	AGNES	PINTER	173e45	Universidad Autonoma de Madrid	It’s the Final Countdown! Threshold Public Good Games with Horizon Uncertainty	In 2018, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel for Climate Change Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5&ordm;C above pre-industrial levels urged for drastic changes for global temperatures to be kept to this maximum raise (UN IPCC, 2018). Even half a degree above this threshold may significantly worsen the risks of drought, floods, extreme heat and poverty for hundreds of millions of people, highlights The Guardian on 8 October 2018 in an article entitled &ldquo;We have 12 years to limit climate change catastrophe, warns UN&rdquo;. One year later, on 19 September 2019, The New York Times questions the precision of these dates in an article entitled &ldquo;Do We Really Have Only 12 Years to Avoid Climate Disaster? The widely recited 12-year deadline is wrong &mdash; and right&rdquo; In this paper, we study through a series of laboratory experiments the effects of timing uncertainty on the joint efforts to avoid irreversible damages, and we ask whether timing uncertainty favors or hurts cooperative action. Specifically, we implement three treatments that differ in the degree of uncertainty regarding the period at which a catastrophe might occur if collective action has not succeeded in reaching a particular threshold.  We find that most groups manage to avoid the catastrophe when there is no time uncertainty, but when the moment of occurrence of the catastrophe is uncertain, the number of groups that meet the threshold with their contribution decreases significantly. Beside analyzing the incentives behind the decisions of the contributors, we also study the (individual) characteristics and the (group) dynamics that help to avoid the catastrophe, in order to understand the factors that determine the destiny of a group. Our results show that although the subjects make higher efforts to achieve the threshold, but clearly these efforts are still insufficient to avoid the catastrophe.	Carmen Arguedas, Hubert J. Kiss
d1_s03_rc	d1_s03_rc	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room C	Decision Theory & Beliefs I	PEIRAN	JIAO	3a60c3	Maastricht University	Is it really not about the money? Belief elicitation in the domain of socially responsible investment	Trillions of dollars are invested in socially responsible businesses. However, the true underlying mechanism for investors' socially responsible investment is yet unknown. In this paper, we investigate beliefs towards an ESG (environmental, social, governance) fund in an incentivized lab experiment. Subjects in our experiment were given exactly the same information about a fund with or without knowing that the fund has a high ESG rating between treatments, and we designed methods to formally evaluate their beliefs about the fund's return and risk for both short-run (1 year) and long-run (3 years), updating of belief in the face of positive and negative return information, and perception of the level of ambiguity. We find that knowing the high ESG rating increased subjects' return expectation, which is the opposite of what has been found in widely used unincentivized survey studies. Moreover, the high ESG rating made subjects more conservative when updating on negative information, and perceive lower ambiguity. This suggests that the unincentivized elicitation of ESG-related beliefs could be systematically biased. Our results contribute to the understanding of why investors hold high ESG investments and and to the design of relevant policies.	Rob Bauer, Bin Dong
d1_s03_rc	d1_s03_rc	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room C	Decision Theory & Beliefs I	PETER	MATTHEWS	a6a74d	Middlebury College	Income Rank and Individual Welfare:  Experimental Evidence	There is widespread agreement that income rank matters to individuals.  The standard resolution of the Easterlin Paradox, for example, underscores the positive relationship between overall rank and life satisfaction.  Causal evidence for such claims is scant, however.  Further, the relevant reference group, or for that matter welfare measure, is too often assumed.  In a pre-registered experiment with a representative sample of Finns, we use an information provision protocol to investigate how increased awareness of position within different reference groups - education, municipality, occupation, for example - affects life satisfaction, fairness perceptions and other measures of individual welfare.  In the process, we also characterize the accuracy of rank beliefs across groups.  Our dataset, which integrates experimental and administrative data, confirms the Easternlin correlation, but finds no causal effect of relative income information on life satisfaction.  We do find, however, that relative position does matter to individuals: relative income shocks cause variations in fairness perceptions, wage satisfaction and being pleased with income.  Because there is substantial variation in the magnitude of these effects across reference groups, our data further underscore that the welfare effects of income differences turn on the question ``compared to whom?''	Michael Kirchler, Kaisa Kotakorpi, Satu Metsalampi, Topi Miettinen, Xiaogeng Xu and Peter Hans Matthews
d1_s03_rc	d1_s03_rc	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room C	Decision Theory & Beliefs I	YANG	ZHONG	2e662b	University of Amsterdam	Time Pressure Preferences	Many professional and educational settings require individuals to be willing and able to perform under time pressure. We use a lab experiment to elicit preferences for working under time pressure in an incentivized way by eliciting the minimum additional payment participants require to complete a cognitive task under various levels of time pressure versus completing it without pressure. We make three main contributions. First, we document that participants are averse to working under time pressure on aggregate. Second, we show that there is substantial heterogeneity in the degree of time pressure aversion across individuals and that these individual preferences can be partially captured by simple survey questions. Third, we elicit these questions in a survey of bachelor students and show that time pressure preferences correlate with future career plans. Our results indicate that individual differences in time pressure aversion could be an influential factor in determining labor market outcomes.	Thomas Buser, Roel van Veldhuizen, Yang Zhong
d1_s03_rc	d1_s03_rc	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room C	Decision Theory & Beliefs I	JANINA	HOFMANN	bf1a5a	University of Passau	The Use of Algorithmic Support: Are Individuals Averse Towards Algorithms or Rather Overconfident Regarding Their Skills?	Although algorithms are often more efficient in strategic decision-making than humans, humans show aversion against the use of algorithmic support. Reasons for algorithm aversion that have been studied in the literature range from lack of trust and lack of information to reluctance to relinquish control. In non-algorithmic contexts, experimental evidence shows that overconfident individuals are less likely to delegate decisions. Although overconfidence may be an important factor which influences the use of algorithmic support, so far, it has not been studied in this context. Therefore, the aim of this study is to investigate whether overconfidence is a cause of algorithm aversion. Moreover, I examine whether the use of algorithmic support significantly differs if individuals can either delegate their decisions to an algorithm or instead can receive advice from an algorithm which has yet not been studied concretely. Thus, the design of the experiment allows to analyze how overconfidence impacts decisions to use an algorithm contingent on the level of control over the algorithmic support.  To disentangle the effect of overconfidence and control over algorithms on algorithm aversion, I conduct an online experiment where participants perform an incentivized forecasting task. The experiment comprises a 2x2 full-factorial between-subject design. First, I systematically vary whether individuals receive feedback about their performance in the forecasting task, or not. Providing participants with feedback about their actual performance reduces overconfidence and, therefore, allows to study the effect of overconfidence on algorithm aversion.  Second, I vary whether participants can receive advice from an algorithm or delegate the decision to an algorithm. Thereby, I can investigate the effect of overconfidence at different levels of control alters the use of algorithmic support. In all treatments, I measure the willingness-to-pay for the use of algorithmic support to analyze whether there exists a significant difference between the willingness-to-pay for advice and delegation. I expect that the usage of algorithmic support is higher when humans have more control over the usage of the algorithm and are less overconfident regarding their skills. Therefore, this experimental study contributes to an improved understanding of the factors that lead to algorithm aversion and provides important insights that are relevant to the ongoing debate about the regulation of algorithms. Moreover, the results will have implications for the design of algorithms in human-computer interactions.	Janina Hofmann
d1_s03_rc	d1_s03_rc	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room C	Decision Theory & Beliefs I	BEN	GREINER	a4e611	Vienna University of Economics and Business	Incentives, Framing, and Trust in AI: An experimental study	We examine how compensation contract design and algorithm framing influence decision makers&rsquo; performance and reliance on algorithmic advice in a price estimation task. Previous experimental studies (Arkes et al., 1986; Ashton, 1990) observed the paradoxical phenomenon that financial incentives undermine potentially positive effects of algorithm use, as they seem to encourage decision-makers to exert unproductive effort rather than relying on the algorithm. Based on a large sample of almost 1,500 participants, we find that compared to a fixed compensation, financial incentives consistently lead to more (and not less) reliance on algorithmic advice, to an increase in invested effort, and to an increase in performance both with and without algorithmic advice. These effects of incentives are similar when employing tournament vs. performance-based incentives. We further find that framing the algorithm description as also incorporating human-expert judgment has positive effects on acceptance of the algorithm. These findings have direct implications for the employment of algorithmic advice and decision tools in managerial practice.	Ben Greiner, Philipp Grünwald, Thomas Lindner, Georg Lintner, Martin Wiernsperger
d1_s03_rd	d1_s03_rd	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room D	Labor I	DEEPTI	BHATIA	c63948	University of Konstanz	Caste and Unequal Access to Education: An Experimental Study	We study caste-based discrimination and belief updating of employers, using a lab experiment in India. We vary the access to education of potential employees and test if the information about the education opportunity changes the extent of discrimination and belief updating. Overall, we do not find significant evidence for discrimination, irrespective of the information provided, although the non-upper caste employers discriminate in favour of their own group in the initial rounds. Over time, both the upper caste and non-upper caste employers update their beliefs about the true ability distribution and statistically discriminate in favour of upper caste employees.	Ankush Asri, Deepti Bhatia, Urs Fischbacher
d1_s03_rd	d1_s03_rd	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room D	Labor I	ALEX	CHAN	a51553	Stanford University	Discrimination and Quality Signals: A Field Experiment with Healthcare Shoppers	This paper provides evidence that customer discrimination in the market for doctors can be largely accounted for by biased beliefs and prejudice with denial. I evaluate customer preferences in the field with an online platform where cash-paying consumers can shop and book a provider for medical procedures based on a novel experimental paradigm called validated incentivized conjoint analysis (VIC). Customers evaluate doctor options they know to be hypothetical to be matched with a customized menu of real doctors, preserving incentives. Racial discrimination reduces patient willingness-to-pay for black and Asian doctors by 12.7% and 8.7% of the average colonoscopy price respectively; customers are willing to travel 100&ndash;250 miles to see a white doctor instead of a black doctor, and somewhere between 50&ndash;100 to 100&ndash;250 miles to see a white doctor instead of an Asian doctor. Further, providing signals of doctor quality reduces this willingness-to-pay racial gap by about 90%, which suggests that statistical discrimination could be an important cause of the gap. The willingness-to-pay penalties on minority doctors are multiples of actual average quality differences, which suggest something more than accurate statistical discrimination is at play. Actual booking behavior allows cross-validation of incentive compatibility of stated preference elicitation via VIC.	Alex Chan
d1_s03_rd	d1_s03_rd	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room D	Labor I	BRENDAN	CUSHING-DANIELS	753bec	Gettysburg College	Overconfidence in the Domain of Losses	Several prior studies put forward the use of loss-framed contracts in place of gain-framed contracts as a way to increase performance of subjects in the lab and employees in the field. We challenge the loss aversion as the prevalent factor explaining the increased performance levels and contract type choices along with the found gender differences in the gains vs. losses domains. Our model incorporates the measures of overconfidence in terms of overestimation of own ability and overplacement relative to others. Contrary to current overconfidence literature, our results indicate that in the domain of losses, women are more often overconfident than in the domain of gains, and for those who are overconfident, they are more overconfident than men. Elicited gender norms subjects hold offer further insight into their contract type choices.	Rimvydas Baltaduonis, Brendan Cushing-Daniels, Marta Maras
d1_s03_rd	d1_s03_rd	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room D	Labor I	SATIA	ROŻYNEK	db17db	University of Warsaw	Who is afraid of new technologies? Perception of workers in CEE countries	Who is afraid of new technologies? Perception of workers in CEE countries   The development and adoption of new technologies alter the array of tasks performed by human and capital factors. With technological solutions gradually overtaking routine (and programmable) activities, certain workers may be afraid of losing particular job tasks and, eventually, their employment. In this study, I investigate the factors determining the fear of new technologies (information systems, specialised software, algorithms and robots). I focus mainly on workers&rsquo; automation experience, the routine task intensity of their jobs, and the levels of technology adoption in six CEE countries. Such an approach sheds light on workers' awareness of the tech-related changes in labour markets. I hypothesise that the current job automation experience, performing more routine tasks and being employed in countries of higher technology adoption deepen one&rsquo;s fear of new technologies.   To verify the hypotheses, an especially designed survey was conducted among over 11 thousand individuals in 6 CEE countries (Austria, Czechia, Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia) between December 2021 and January 2022. The responders were asked four questions about their perception of new technologies. The first one regarded their recent experience with new technologies at workplaces (complementarity, substitution, no impact on job tasks). Then, we surveyed their concerns regarding the automation potential for a worker&rsquo;s job tasks within the next ten years. In the third question, the responders were asked to what extent they fear that new technologies may lead to massive unemployment, and the last concerned their job insecurity (both within the next ten years). A fear of new technologies measure was constructed following a well-established method of synthesising the same-scale questions (second, third and fourth).  I used the PIAAC dataset to calculate the Routine Task Intensity measure. Then, I mapped it to the survey on a country-occupation level, capturing the between-country heterogeneity. The technology adoption measures were derived from Eurostat. To the best of my knowledge, this is the first study to incorporate a worker&rsquo;s automation experience, RTI and countries&rsquo; technology adoption, deepening the understanding of the impact of technological transformation on workers.   The preliminary results suggest that performing more routine job tasks is positively correlated with the fear of new technologies. Furthermore, having experienced automation in the past significantly affects one&rsquo;s perception of future automation potential. Interestingly, the relationship between technology adoption and fear of new technologies is not as expected &ndash; workers from countries with lower technology adoption fear it more, perhaps anticipating what is yet to come.  	Satia Rożynek
d1_s03_rd	d1_s03_rd	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room D	Labor I	MIRCO	TONIN	f21e40	Free University of Bozen-Bolzano	Wage Expectations and Access to Healthcare Occupations: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment	Health systems around the world face an increasing shortage of workers and it is important to understand the process of people entering the sector.  We study how financial incentives affect the performance in the entry test into  medical and healthcare schools, a crucial step for would-be healthcare workers.    To this end, we conduct a randomized information experiment with Italian applicants. We first elicit applicants' expectations about the starting wage of the healthcare job they want to study for. We then inform the treatment group about the true starting wages, while we provide no information to the control group. We finally collect the test scores obtained by applicants. Correcting wage expectations enhances the test scores when expectations are lower than the true wage level, while no significant effects occur when expectations are higher. The treatment does not induce negative selection in terms of generosity or ability. Our findings provide novel experimental evidence that wages matter for prospective students in the health sector and suggest an impact of prospective financial rewards also at a very early stage of careers.	Juliana Bernhofer, Alessandro Fedele, Mirco Tonin
d1_s03_re	d1_s03_re	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room E	Field Experiments: Environment & Finance	DANIEL	SALICATH	7acf6c	MAX PLANCK INSTITUTE FOR RESEARCH ON COLLECTIVE GOODS	Reducing consumption of arsenic contaminated groundwater: Evidence from an RCT in India	Information interventions have been widely used in the health context given the low implementation cost, yet there is mixed evidence about their effectiveness. In this study, we investigate how spreading information can be used to promote healthy practices in consumption of safe drinking water. Arsenic-contaminated groundwater is consumed by approximately 300 million people worldwide and has severe health consequences given its carcinogenic nature. Health problems range from skin lesions, mental health issues, to cancer. Yet there is limited awareness about arsenic and its mitigation techniques in developing countries where safe water infrastructure is scarce. We test how information based interventions can be used to change behaviors through an RCT.  We observe that the intervention was successful in spreading arsenic awareness and that the efficacy of the intervention is highlighted by a reduction in measured arsenic quantity. 	Shambhavi Priyam, Daniel Salicath and Matthias Sutter
d1_s03_re	d1_s03_re	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room E	Field Experiments: Environment & Finance	ANDREJ	GILL	7d82a5	Gutenberg University Mainz	Time Inconsistency and Overdraft Use: Evidence from Transaction Data and Behavioral Measurement Experiments	Households regularly fail to make optimal&ensp;financial decisions. But what are the underlying reasons for this? Using two conceptually distinct measures of time inconsistency based on bank account transaction data and behavioral measurement experiments, we show that the excessive use of bank account overdrafts is linked to time inconsistency. By contrast, there is no correlation between a survey-based measure of financial literacy and overdraft usage. Our results indicate that consumer education and information may not suffice to overcome mistakes in households'&ensp;financial decision-making. Rather, behaviorally motivated interventions targeting specific biases in decision-making should also be considered as effective policy tools.	Andrej Gill, Florian Hett, Johannes Tischer
d1_s03_re	d1_s03_re	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room E	Field Experiments: Environment & Finance	LARA	EZQUERRA	356d70	University of the Balearic Islands	Promoting Pro-Environmental Behavior: a Field Experiment on Soft-Commitment and Waste-Sorting	<br>Fighting climate change requires citizenship participation in pro-environmental activities. We run a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effects of soft-commitment to promote such activities. Taking advantage of a card-scanning system that records individual, real- time data on the use of bio-waste bins, we observe actual participation in waste-sorting. Being given the offer to sign a soft commitment increased participation in waste sorting by 7-8 percentage points (0.22 s.d.). This positive effect of the soft commitment operates through the extensive margin (households start to sort their waste); and it does almost not affect the intensive margin (household adherence to waste sorting). Besides, and consistent with habit formation models, we also show that the positive effect of the soft commitment persists almost one year after being offered.	Eduard Alonso-Pauli, Pau Balart, Inigo Hernandez Arenaz
d1_s03_re	d1_s03_re	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room E	Field Experiments: Environment & Finance	ALICE	PIZZO	88a905	COPENHAGEN BUSINESS SCHOOL	Food for thought: a field experiment on the price sensitivity of and the impact of information provision on sustainable food choices.	Food production is a primary contributor to climate change, and there&rsquo;s a growing interest in policies to reduce emissions through consumption choices. In a field experiment, we aim at investigating the impact of an informational intervention about the carbon footprint of food options on actual food choices in the context of a public festival with a food market area. Our experimental design includes the distribution of double-sided discount vouchers for either a meat based and a vegetarian food option. The dual nature of the voucher and the possibility of only choosing to use one of the two discounts enable us to tap into consumers&rsquo; price sensitivity for the more sustainable food option. By interacting the  information and discount provision, we are able to investigate the monetary equivalent to our behavioural intervention. Prior to random treatment allocation and discount voucher distribution, our participants answer to a survey which includes some demographics, background questions and questions on attitudes and motivations towards climate change.  The treatment group eventually receives carbon footprint information of the food choices available at the market. Since we expect that people might attend the event in group, we tap into their social interactions and social effect on their food choices by controlling the type of treatment they receive. We frame the discount provision as a lottery to avoid the sense of unfairness.  In summary, we test whether the provision of carbon emissions information of food options influences actual food choices at the time of the event. Secondly, we draw a demand curve for price elasticity of the more sustainable food options by testing consumers&rsquo; price sensitivity by the means of our discount scheme: both within discount scheme by treatment and across discount scheme within treatment. Thirdly, we are able to measure the corresponding monetary value of our information intervention. Finally, we study the group dynamic by tracking the group composition of each participant, while controlling for individuals heterogeneity. &#10;	Alice Pizzo, Jan M. Bauer, Lucia Reisch, Efthymios Altsitsiadis
d1_s03_re	d1_s03_re	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room E	Field Experiments: Environment & Finance	JACOPO	BONAN	4fd97a	Politecnico di Milano	Direct and cross-resource spillover effects of social information about water usage	Social information programs are widely used to nudge behavioural change. Their behavioral spillover beyond the targeted outcome and interaction with other nudges are often overlooked, leading to the possible mis-estimation of their cost-effectiveness and welfare impacts. Through an RCT with water clients of a multi-utility, we test the impact of a social information campaign to nudge water conservation. We exploit customers&rsquo; variability in the presence of gas and electricity contracts and in the reception of other resources' reports, similar to the water one. We find that the water report significantly decreases water and electricity usage over the two post-treatment years, particularly for customers for whom the water report is the first one to be received. Gas and electricity customers receiving the program are significantly less likely to deactivate their contract.	Jacopo Bonan, Cristina Cattaneo, Giovanna d'Adda, Arianna Galliera, Massimo Tavoni
d1_s03_rf	d1_s03_rf	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room F	Social Norms and Morals II	KATHARINA	MOMSEN	f1f1a7	University of Innsbruck	Seller Opportunism in Credence Good Markets - The Role of Market Conditions	We report the results of an experiment to systematically investigate the influence of the market setting in credence good markets on opportunism in the sellers' decisions. We find that, even with the extreme information asymmetry in these markets, sellers' decisions made under a direct sales regime are significantly more selfish than purchase recommendations. This indicates that moral disengagement is susceptible to market design. Moreover, average choices are more opportunistic when a costless diagnosis is required to assess the buyer's needs - sellers exploit moral wiggle room by avoiding information. Both of these effects are at odds with predictions of standard rational choice and tend to significantly reduce market efficiency. Thus, from an experimental point of view, the specific choice of these design features might be less innocuous than generally presumed. The parametrization of the decision problem has a strong influence: in the terminology of the credence goods literature, we find that sellers overtreat and buyers self-select into overtreatment.	Katharina Momsen, Markus Ohndorf
d1_s03_rf	d1_s03_rf	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room F	Social Norms and Morals II	JOSÉ IGNACIO	RIVERO WILDEMAUWE	dc7d12	THEMA - CY Cergy-Paris Université	Are sellers willing to sell lemons? An experimental study	We conduct a laboratory experiment to assess the willingness to sell a "lemon", i.e., to undertake an action that provides a benefit to self but inflicts a loss on someone else. We investigate whether this is more likely when the decision is described in neutral terms versus when it is presented as a market situation. In addition, we study the role of other-regarding preferences and (Kantian) moral concerns, specifically aiming to disentangle their effects. When evaluating an action, morally motivated individuals consider what their own payoff would have been in the hypothetical case where roles were reversed and the other subject took the same decision (universalization). We vary the salience of role uncertainty, thus varying the ease for participants to envisage the role-reversal scenario. We employ a series of perfect-stranger, one-shot take Dictator Games. We find that (1) subjects are more likely to sell a "lemon" when the decision is framed in market terms, and (2) they are less likely to do so when they are better able to visualise the counterfactual where roles are interchanged. The latter is consistent with the presence of moral concerns of a Kantian nature in the decision-making process. We also structurally estimate other-regarding and Kantian moral concern parameters.  Keywords: Lemons problem, adverse selection, social preferences, Kantian morality, experiment.	Ingela Alger, José Ignacio Rivero Wildemauwe
d1_s03_rf	d1_s03_rf	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room F	Social Norms and Morals II	NIKITA	GRABHER-MEYER	5a2d38	UEA	Integrity Education, Market Intermediaries and Corruption	Market exchange in countries with weak institutions is often plagued by corruption. Most corrupt business transactions are facilitated by private intermediaries such as lawyers, who reduce the moral costs of clients and public officials, thus increasing corruption. Instilling integrity in market participants has been advocated as an important solution. We conducted a lab-in-the-field experiment to test whether integrity training can reduce intermediaries&rsquo; propensity to facilitate corrupt transactions and embezzle. We randomly allocated offers to undergraduate law students in Ukraine to receive training in integrity and anti-corruption. We measured post-training attitudes and behavior via questionnaires and a novel experimental bribery game, in which law students acted as intermediaries who could facilitate corrupt transactions at the expense of society and their clients. We compared the incidence and amount of bribe requests, and amount embezzled, between trained and untrained intermediaries. In addition, in order to understand whether integrity training worked by changing preferences or norms, we also introduced a second experimental variation by randomly allocating both trained and untrained intermediaries to receiving (or not) information that a majority of intermediaries in their group were integrity trained (i.e. descriptive social norm). Preliminary results show that training alone had an insignificant impact on dishonest behaviour, but the information framing training as the norm significantly reduced corruption irrespective of whether its recipient was trained or not. Information was more effective for first-year students, whose behaviour changed in line with their beliefs about a reduced incidence of corruption. Finally, survey results based on the Moral Foundations Theory indicate that the training did not alter fundamental moral judgements in any significant way. However, training increased students&rsquo; awareness that accountability for corrupt acts is shared by all actors involved. Overall the results suggest that widespread information about training reduced corruption by changing beliefs about the peers&rsquo; unethical behaviour. We also find mild evidence that training itself increased the moral cost of corruption through a mechanism of internalizing responsibility.	Oana Borcan, Nikita Grabher-Meyer, Amrish Patel, Stephanie Heger
d1_s03_rf	d1_s03_rf	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room F	Social Norms and Morals II	NATALIA	MONTINARI	3de262	Università degli Studi di Bologna	Eliciting family norms in a representative survey	In a representative sample of the Italian population with respect to gender, age groups and area of residence, we provide an elicitation of social norms over possible action choices implying different degrees of gender equality between two partners in the allocation of chores. We vary i) partners&rsquo; contribution to the family labor income; ii) presence of children; iii) partner taking initiative (i.e. who proposes how to share duties). We elicit social norms using incentivized coordination games (Krupka &amp; Weber 2013) that is on people&rsquo;s beliefs about others&rsquo; beliefs in a reference group. We find that young generation considers &laquo;equality&raquo; of contributions to household duties significantly more appropriate than old generation, even in situations where women contributing less to family income. Secondly, we document the existence of a double standard: women contributing to household duties less their partners&raquo; always judged more severly than &laquo;men contributing less&raquo;, even when partners are ex-ante equal. Finally, which partner is taking initiative matters in all age groups: Framing effect exacerbates the gender double standard.	Is "asking" all you have to do? Eliciting family norms in a representative survey
d1_s03_rf	d1_s03_rf	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room F	Social Norms and Morals II	NICOLA	LACETERA	e1a2de	University of Toronto	Is the price right? The role of morals, ideology, and tradeoff thinking in explaining reactions to price surges	Price surges often generate social disapproval and requests for regulation and price controls, but these interventions may cause inefficiencies and shortages. To study how individuals perceive and reason about sudden price increases for different products under different policy regimes, we conduct a survey experiment with Canadian and U.S. residents. Econometric and textual analyses indicate that prices are not seen just as signals of scarcity; they cause widespread opposition and strong and polarized moral reactions. However, acceptance of unregulated prices is higher when potential economic tradeoffs between unregulated and controlled prices are salient and when higher production costs contribute to the price increases. The salience of tradeoffs also reduces the polarization of moral judgments between supporters and opponents of unregulated pricing. In part, the acceptance of free price adjustments is driven by people&rsquo;s overall attitudes about the function of markets and the government in society. These findings are corroborated by a donation experiment, and they suggest that awareness of the causes and potential consequences of price increases may induce less extreme views about the role of market institutions in governing the economy.	Julio Elías, Nicola Lacetera, and Mario Macis
d1_s03_ri	d1_s03_ri	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences I	KIRYL	KHALMETSKI	a6bc5e	University of Bath	Altruistic punishment as norm-signaling	It has been firmly established that altruistic punishment plays a major role in establishing cooperation in social dilemmas, yet precise motivations behind this behaviour remain to a large extent unclear. We provide a theoretical model which explains punishment behaviour in a public good game as a costly signaling device, based on the assumption that players care about others&rsquo; beliefs about the social norm. In particular, in equilibrium a given player can credibly signal her private information about the social norm by punishing others, and hence shift their perception of the social norm in a way beneficial to the punishing player. The predictions of the model are supported by the results from a public good experiment, where subjects&rsquo; react to exogenously generated signals about the social norm.	Kiryl Khalmetski, Axel Ockenfels
d1_s03_ri	d1_s03_ri	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences I	ARJUN	SENGUPTA	f3f898	University of Nottingham	What is a Fair Contribution? Nominal Choice Shifts Contribution Norms in a Public Goods Game	In a public goods game with heterogeneous endowment, we investigate whether allowing individuals to make a nominal choice in the process that determines their endowment influences the group&rsquo;s contribution norms. We hypothesized that individuals in the choice condition would be more likely than those in the baseline condition to believe that group members are entitled to their endowment. We found that contributions move from an equity norm in the baseline condition toward an equality norm in the choice condition. This shift in contribution norms is sustained by smaller contributions by high endowment individuals receiving lower punishment in the choice condition.  	Arjun Sengupta, Krishna Savani
d1_s03_ri	d1_s03_ri	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences I	EUGENIO	VERRINA	c37e6b	GATE-Lyon	The asymmetric effect of narratives on prosocial behavior	We study how positive narratives (stories in favor of a prosocial action) and negative narratives (stories in favor of a selfish action) influence prosocial behavior in a series of lab and online experiments with more than 1500 subjects. We find that, both positive and negative narratives are effective at changing how actions are perceived. However, while positive narratives increase prosocial behavior, negative narratives do not move aggregate behavior and &mdash; if anything &mdash; lead to slightly more prosocial behavior. Our results indicate that this may be due to the fact that when following a negative narrative an individual is viewed as influenceable &mdash; something that appears to be undesirable. Taken together, our study suggests that positive and negative narratives are not just the flip sides of the same coin.	Adrian Hillenbrand and Eugenio Verrina
d1_s03_ri	d1_s03_ri	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences I	SERGIO	MITTLAENDER	b8822f	FGV & Max Planck Institute for Social Law and Social Policy	Retaliation, Remedies, and Property	The law can protect legal entitlements and rights either through a liability rule that allows victims to claim compensation for their losses or through a property rule that allows victims to prevent others from violating the entitlement. In case of takings, liability rule protection has several advantages over property rule protection, but the literature has not studied how far each of these rules is better apt to resolve the conflict that emerges after takings, thereby crowding out the human tendency to retaliate, often in socially costly ways, against those who violate entitlements. This article explains how property rule protection can better serve this function, presents evidence from a lab experiment that reveals how property rules better reduce retaliation after takings than liability rules, and then discuss its implications for the optimal choice of how the law should protect legal entitlements to maximize social welfare.	Sergio Mittlaender
d1_s03_ri	d1_s03_ri	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences I	LUDOVICA	SPINOLA	08bb25	Ca' Foscari University	On the relationship between information and individuals’ perception in affecting income tax evasion	We experimentally test how information about the number of caught tax evaders, by interacting with individuals&rsquo; prior beliefs, affect the decision to underreport taxes. Specifically, our results indicate that when individuals receive the information about the number of people caught evading taxes and perceive this as higher than prior beliefs, they evade less. When, instead, individuals consider the number of caught evaders as low with respect to their beliefs, they evade more. These findings suggest that when subjects are informed on how many people have been found evading taxes they infer the audit probability, rather than the tax evasion rate. Finally, we observe no salience bias effect when comparing individuals to whom we highlighted information about others&rsquo; norm violation with those to whom we emphasised the probability of being audited.	Ludovica Spinola
d1_s03_rl	d1_s03_rl	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room L	Market & Media	MATTEO	SCACCHI	90b88c	Università  Insubria	Accessibility of Options in Online Decisions: An Experiment on the Acceptance of Cookies	Accepting cookies when browsing the Internet may pose a threat to one&rsquo;s online privacy. Typically, the choice to consent to the use of cookies is presented through a banner which features a prominent button to accept all cookies and a less prominent button (or even a link in the text) to reject or customize them. There is reason to believe that such &lsquo;choice architecture&rsquo; may increase the probability of consenting to cookies. In this paper, we test two digital nudges to reduce cookie acceptance rates: a salience nudge and a framing nudge. The salience nudge involved making the rejection button of a cookie banner more visually prominent (or &ldquo;salient&rdquo;) than the button to accept all cookies. The framing nudge was applied to the button labels and involved their rephrasing from affirmations (&ldquo;accept all cookies&rdquo; vs &ldquo;reject non-necessary&rdquo;) to negations (&ldquo;don&rsquo;t reject non-necessary&rdquo; vs. &ldquo;don&rsquo;t accept non-necessary&rdquo;). Participants (N=361) were invited to take part in an online personality test and were presented with a banner with either the salience nudge or the framing nudge, or both. Results show that the framing nudge reduced cookie acceptance rate by around 20 percentage points when applied alone (p=0.005), and by around 50 percentage points when applied with the salience nudge (p<0.001). By contrast, the salience nudge proved effective in conjunction with the framing nudge but ineffective per se. These findings suggest that digital nudging can be a powerful tool to reduce cookie acceptance.	Congiu Luca, Scacchi Matteo
d1_s03_rl	d1_s03_rl	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room L	Market & Media	ELEONORA	ALABRESE	bb3cc2	Warwick	Bad Science: Retractions, Citations and Media Coverage.	Bad science can be hard to eradicate. This creates the potential for dissemination of misinformation within and outside academia. This work shows that media coverage can be helpful to the auto-correcting process of science. I use a conditional difference-in-differences strategy to show that retracted articles experience larger citation losses in the presence of media coverage and the remaining post-citations mention more often that the paper is indeed retracted. I further show suggestive evidence of selection into treatment for papers attracting excess coverage and that journals that generally publish popular articles are those where retractions happen faster and where citation penalties are larger. The differential effect of media coverage is observed only for hard sciences, suggesting distinct publication practices may impact the visibility of the retraction. I finally show that newspapers are more likely to cover the publication of a paper rather than its retraction, an imbalance that could impact public perception of scholars&rsquo; trustworthiness.	Eleonora Alabrese
d1_s03_rl	d1_s03_rl	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room L	Market & Media	MATTIA	NARDOTTO	f2ebc2	ULB	Price norms and consumer behavior	Retail pricing exhibits a ubiquitous pattern of slow moving regular prices interspersed with large temporary sales (Nakamura and Steinsson 2008). This pattern holds across markets, across countries, and over time, and plays a role in monetary policy. A variety of mechanisms have been proposed to explain some aspects of this pattern, notably models of supply side frictions, such as menu costs or uncertainty about demand, models of consumer heterogeneity argue sales are a tool for intertemporal price discrimination, based either on heterogeneity in willingness to pay, or in storage costs. However, most models so far fall short in explaining price some features of the price adjustments we observe in the data, namely the sequences of small price increments on one hand, and the frequent and large discounts on the other hand. This paper argues that the ubiquity and nature of sales pricing reflects two key departures from standard models of consumer decision making. First, valuation of a choice option is not assessed in isolation but rather relative to norms retrieved from memory; a sale price is attractive not only because it is low (as in standard models) but also because it compares favorably to previous experience of regular, high price. The gain to the consumer draws attention, particularly if the discount is large, and increases his valuation for the good, artificially boosting demand. Second, the norms that shape valuation, being memory processes, are malleable to cues in the choice environment. Both features have been studied in psychology and in economics, and a unifying framework was provided in Bordalo, Gennaioli and Shleifer (2020). In this paper we show that this explains the data coming from a field experiment that took place in more than 500 stores of a large grocery chain where for 6 months we manipulated the prices of a set of products. We show that purchase patterns induced by the price changes are explained by the preference structure underlying the behavioral model, and that price pattern that we observe in retail are optimal given such preferences.	Pedro Bordalo, Mattia Nardotto, and Sandra Sequeira
d1_s03_rl	d1_s03_rl	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room L	Market & Media	NIKOLAI	SACHS	732f8b	University of Passau	Privacy Risks in Digital Markets: The Impact of Ambiguity Preferences on Transparency Choices	Consumers often lack information about how digital devices and services collect, use and protect their data. Transparency is thus viewed as an essential prerequisite to support consumers in making informed privacy decisions. However, whether and when individuals actually prefer transparency about privacy risks if given a chance to avoid it remains an open research question. Therefore, this study investigates individuals&rsquo; choices between varying levels of transparency when they face the threat of an uncertain disclosure of their personal data. In a randomized controlled online experiment based on a between-subjects Ellsberg-type design, subjects repeatedly choose between a situation of risk, where the disclosure of their personal data occurs with a known probability, and a situation of ambiguity, where the disclosure of their personal data occurs with an unknown probability. In the experiment, we vary the general likelihood of data disclosure between treatments. We find strong empirical support that general ambiguity preferences extend to people&rsquo;s transparency choices in privacy contexts. In particular, we find that most individuals avoid ambiguity and thus prefer transparency for low likelihood privacy losses. However, this pattern reverses for high likelihood privacy losses and when subjects perceive data disclosure as a gain. Most notably, a significant share of people seek ambiguity and, therefore, prefer to avoid transparency when facing high likelihood privacy risks. These results have important policy implications as they question the effectiveness of current regulatory initiatives to promote transparency in digital markets by voluntary privacy labels.	Nikolai Sachs, Daniel Schnurr
d1_s03_rl	d1_s03_rl	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room L	Market & Media	THEODORE	TUROCY	6d39b7	University of East Anglia	A new method for measuring consumer willingness to engage with market tasks	In some important retail markets&mdash;for example, markets for domestic energy, financial services and telecommunications&mdash;many consumers choose deals that are clearly not the best available to them.   These developments are matters of serious concern to industry and market regulators because they conflict with two of the primary objectives of regulation&mdash;protecting consumers against unfair trading practices and ensuring that markets are competitive.  There is a growing perception among regulators that there is a deficiency of consumer engagement with the market.  If consumers choose not to search even when relevant information is easily accessible and when search is well rewarded, interventions which target the search process will be ineffective.   We develop an experimental methodology for eliciting individuals' preferences between tasks, and mapping these preferences to a monetary scale; specifically, we find monetary equivalents for non-monetary features of consumer search tasks which make those tasks more or less engaging.  As a proof-of-concept, we report results on a comparison between search tasks framed as finding a city-centre hotel for a business trip, versus choosing a domestic energy tariff.  We find that a majority of participants are willing to forego potential earnings in order to do the hotel task instead of an energy tariff task with similar earnings potential.  Subjective reports of ratings of task enjoyment and personal efficacy on the search tasks correlate both with the revealed incentivised preferences, and also with the real-world tasks on which the experimental ones are based.	Amelia Fletcher; Bruce Lyons; Robert Sugden; Theodore Turocy; Mengjie Wang
d1_s03_rm	d1_s03_rm	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room M	The Economics Profession & Methodology	KAROLINE	STRÖHLEIN	9622a0	Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Management	Gendered Instructions and Economic Behavior	Natural language is essential for human decision making and interaction. It is used to convey the consequences of choices, the rules of interaction, and to exchange information. In languages with grammatical gender, entity nouns (e.g., &ldquo;the student&rdquo; or &ldquo;the worker&rdquo;) can be written in a male, a female or, more recently, to promote gender equality and to include people identifying as non-binary, in gender-inclusive forms. There is an ongoing debate if the usage of male, female, or gender-inclusive forms triggers gender stereotypes and leads to potential biases in decision making. We conducted a controlled experiment and systematically varied the framing of the instructions either using the male, the female, or the gender-inclusive form. Participants made economic decisions measuring their degree of altruism, reciprocity, and honesty in simple economic games. We study if participants behaved differently when their self-reported gender matched the grammatical gender used in the instructions. We observe a gender gap in altruism if instructions used the (common) male form. In contrast, this gender gap was not present if the gender-inclusive frame was used. This line of research is important for experimental methodology on how to write instructions in languages with grammatical gender and for practitioners in law and organizations.	Paul M. Gorny, Petra Nieken, Karoline Ströhlein
d1_s03_rm	d1_s03_rm	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room M	The Economics Profession & Methodology	JUERGEN	HUBER	c14450	University of Innsbruck	Nobel and novice: Author prominence affects peer review	Peer-review is a well-established cornerstone of the scientific process, yet it is not immune to status bias. Merton identified the problem as one in which prominent researchers get disproportionately great credit for their contribution while relatively unknown researchers get disproportionately little credit. We measure the extent of this effect in the peer-review process through a pre-registered field experiment. We invite more than 3,300 researchers to review a paper jointly written by a prominent author &ndash; a Nobel laureate &ndash; and by a relatively unknown author &ndash; an early-career research associate &ndash;, varying whether reviewers see the prominent author&rsquo;s name, an anonymized version of the paper, or the less well-known author&rsquo;s name. We find strong evidence for the status bias: while only 23 percent recommend &ldquo;reject&rdquo; when the prominent researcher is the only author shown, 48 percent do so when the paper is anonymized, and 65 percent do so when the little known author is the only author shown. Our findings complement and extend earlier results on double-anonymized vs. single-anonymized review and strongly suggest that double-anonymization is a minimum requirement for an unbiased review process.	Jürgen Huber, Sabiou Inoua, Rudolf Kerschbamer, Christian König-Kersting, Stefan Palan, Vernon L. Smith
d1_s03_rm	d1_s03_rm	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room M	The Economics Profession & Methodology	THIBAUT	ARPINON	6fffc5	Université Rennes 1	A Practical Guide to Registered Reports for Economists	The current publication system in economics contributes to the inflation of positive results in empirical papers. Registered Reports, also called Pre-Results Reviews, are a new submission format for empirical works that take pre-registration one step further. In Registered Reports, researchers write their paper before data collection and commit to a detailed data collection process and analysis plan. After a first- stage review, a journal can give an In-Principle-Acceptance which ensures that the paper will be published if the authors proceed to data collection and analysis as they pre-specified. Here, we propose a practical guide to Registered Reports for empirical economists. We illustrate the major problems that Registered Reports address (p-hacking, HARKing, publication bias). We then present practical guidelines on how to write and review Registered Reports (e.g., data analysis plan, power analysis, multiple-hypothesis testing correction), with R and STATA codes. We provide specific examples for experimental economics and show how researchers can improve the design of their studies to maximize statistical power. Last, we discuss some tools that authors, editors and referees can use to evaluate Registered Reports (checklist, study design table, quality assessment). 	Thibaut Arpinon and Romain Espinosa
d1_s03_rm	d1_s03_rm	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room M	The Economics Profession & Methodology	ROEL	VAN VELDHUIZEN	027d4b	Lund University	Causal identification with many experimental treatments	A large and growing percentage of empirical research in economics concerns itself with identifying the causal mechanisms driving observed effects. This approach requires overcoming key challenges including endogeneity problems, omitted variable bias, non-linearities, and interactive effects. We propose to overcome these challenges by identifying the role of causal mechanisms using "many" experimental treatments. The key idea behind our approach is to use these treatments to generate independent exogenous variation in all mechanisms of interest. This allows experimentalists to identify causal treatments in a flexible way. We develop techniques that allow us to efficiently conduct these treatments within the same experiment. We then illustrate our techniques by conducting a laboratory experiment that allows us to identify the causal mechanisms driving gender differences in tournament entry.	Vojtech Bartos & Roel van Veldhuizen
d1_s03_rm	d1_s03_rm	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room M	The Economics Profession & Methodology	MARTINA	VECCHI	19add7	The Pennsylvania State University	Stress or failure? An experimental protocol to distinguish the environmental determinants of decision making	Are economic decisions affected by short-term stress, failure or both? We develop and validate a novel experimental protocol to examine the individual and combined influences of stress, failure and success. The protocol employs a 2x3 experimental design and can be used online or in laboratory studies to analyse the impact of these factors on decision making and behaviour. Participants complete two sessions at least one week apart, during each of which they carry out a variety of decision making tasks. To introduce experimental variation in participants&rsquo; stress levels, participants are assigned to complete an incentivized cognitive task aimed at inducing mild stress, either at the beginning of the first or the second session. The incentive structure for the stress task involves a penalty if they perform below an unknown threshold. With the second experimental treatment we vary participants&rsquo; perceived failure or success by randomizing whether they receive feedback about their performance relative to the threshold, and by varying the threshold. In the second session, prior to the decision making tasks, participants receive either no feedback, feedback with a low threshold level (success condition) or feedback with a high threshold level (failure condition). We validate the protocol in an online experiment with 269 participants. The stress protocol was perceived as significantly more stressful than a control task, and it induced a sizeable and significant rise in state anxiety. The provision of negative feedback (&ldquo;failure&rdquo;) significantly lowered participants&rsquo; assessment of their performance, induced feelings of failure and raised state anxiety.	Martina Vecchi, Nicolai Vitt
d1_s03_rq	d1_s03_rq	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Cognition	NIKHIL	MASTERS	12b86d	University of Essex	The Behavioural Economics of Music: Systematic Review and Future Directions	Music-related decision making encompasses a wide range of behaviours including those associated with listening choices, composition and performance, and decisions involving music education and therapy. Although research programmes in psychology and economics have contributed to an improved understanding of music-related behaviour, historically these disciplines have been unconnected. Recently however, researchers have begun to bridge this gap by employing tools from behavioural economics. This paper contributes to the literature by providing a discussion about the benefits of using behavioural economics in music-decision research. We achieve this in two ways. First, through a systematic review, we identify the current state of the literature within four key areas of behavioural economics &ndash; heuristics and biases, social decision making, behavioural time preferences, and dual-process theory. Second, taking findings of the literature as a starting point, we demonstrate how behavioural economics can inform future research. Based on this, we propose the Behavioural Economics of Music (BEM), an integrated research programme that aims to break new ground by stimulating interdisciplinary research in the intersection between music, psychology, and economics.	Manuel Anglada-Tort, Nikhil Masters, Jochen Steffens, Adrian North, and Daniel Müllensiefen
d1_s03_rq	d1_s03_rq	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Cognition	TATIANA	CELADIN	a52cb1	University of Bologna	Manipulating Response Times in the Cognitive Reflection Test	We employ the Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) to test the effectiveness of two widely applied cognitive manipulations which rely on constraining response times. The CRT measures the ability of an individual to resist giving an immediate response that is intuitive but incorrect in favor of greater reflection to find out the correct answer. We have two conditions: a Time Pressure condition (answer to be given within 30 seconds) and a Time Delay condition (answers to be given after 60 seconds). We find that Time Delay increases the frequency of correct answers, while Time Pressure increases the frequency of incorrect answers, but mostly of the kinds that seem less intuitive (i.e., not the answers that have to be resisted). Gender biases found in other studies are confirmed and, moreover, gender is found to moderate the effects of the experimental conditions: Time Delay increases the frequency of correct answers for men but not for women, while Time Pressure increases the frequency of incorrect but less intuitive answers for women but not for men.	Bilancini Ennio, Boncinelli Leonardo
d1_s03_rq	d1_s03_rq	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Cognition	PABLO	MARCOS-PRIETO	22860a	IMT School of Advanced Studies Lucca	Experience-dependent induction of low-frequency sleep-like activity (extreme ego depletion) can affect socially relevant choices.	The phenomenon of ego-depletion (Baumeister, 1998) is a paradigm that opened a huge debate in behavioral sciences, its results and occurrence being questioned (Carter &amp; McCullough, 2014). During an ego-depletion paradigm, people perform a cognitively demanding task, which has been modified in order to force the use of self-control to be executed correctly (e.g., Stroop-like tasks), resulting in impairment of the execution of activities that require the same cognitive functions. Consequences of these treatments appear to be less commitment to the task, tiredness and impaired cognitive and behavioral performance (Vyazovskiy et al., 2013; Hung et al., 2013; Bernardi et al., 2015), as well as deficiencies in the execution of decisionmaking activities that require cognitive resources (Vohs et al., 2000; Stucke et al., 2006). Decision-making processes are fundamental to direct humans through socially relevant choices, guiding the interaction through pro- or anti-sociality. With this work, we aim at assessing the validity of the ego-depletion paradigm per se, actually measuring the changes that occur in the local EEG of depleted subjects, and investigating the relationships between induced functional frontal fatigue and (non)cooperative behavior, as assessed through economic games that proxy for socially relevant choices.	Erica Ordali, Pablo Marcos-Prieto, Giulia Avvenuti, Leonardo Boncinelli, Emiliano Ricciardi, Ennio Bilancini, Pietro Pietrini, Giulio Bernardi
d1_s03_rq	d1_s03_rq	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Cognition	MICHELA	CHESSA	a7acce	Université Côte d’Azur	Children’s GrI-creativity: Limited resources and gender effects in creative drawing	We define GrI-creativity as the specific creative cognition process resulting in green innovation, i.e., directed toward the generation of green rather than non-green products. In this work, we developed an operational way to investigate the GrI-creativity process and its determinants through a lab-in-the-field experiment with primary school children aged from 7 to 11 years old. Under a tournament incentives scheme, subjects performed a common drawing task with constraints (the use of at least 3 triangles, 3 circles and 3 squares), but with different means: only a black marker, any color among twelve (including black), or three among the same twelve color set. Drawings were later evaluated relying on Amabile&rsquo;s Consensual Assessment Technique (Amabile, 1982): a jury of experts evaluated the creative outputs and the inter-scale reliability was measured through the Cronbach&rsquo;s alpha. We find weak evidence for boys to perform better when given three colors, while girls are extremely sensitive to means made available. Specifically, females did significantly better when given the choice of one color, both with respect to the black marker and three colors conditions. Moreover, we combine our experimental method with insights from social psychology. We provide evidence of a highly significant positive effect on creativity of a high score at the Cognitive Reflection Test and, only for boys, the practice of sport in daily life. To give more robustness to our study, drawings were also catalogued depending on what they depicted. Two groups of categories were defined: the drawings&rsquo; subject (landscape, humanoid or animal-like and not-defined) and if the participants fixated on the geometric figures that were provided as task constraints. We find that this categorization suggests that judges evaluated as less creative drawings whose subject was not defined and those that were fixated on shapes.	Giuseppe Attanasi, Michela Chessa, Carlo Ciucani, Sara Gil Gallen
d1_s03_rq	d1_s03_rq	1 Sep 2022	13:45 - 15:15	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Cognition	GIOVANNA	D'ADDA	3209b0	Università degli Studi di Milano	Daily temperature and purchase of energy-using durables	In this paper we combine  administrative data from an Italian online retailer with daily  weather data to examine how temperature and other weather shocks affect users&rsquo; decision to purchase Air Conditioners (ACs) and other energy-using durables. Based on existing evidence on projection bias in consumer behaviour, we expect high outside temperature on a day to be associated with higher purchases of ACs on that day, but not of other types of appliances. Similarly, humidity and wind speed on a day should affect the purchases of driers, but not of other types of appliances. The empirical results confirm these predictions. In addition, we find that weather-induced purchases of ACs are in lower-efficiency energy classes.  We examine how models of memory and attention can explain these behavioural patterns. Understanding these dynamics is important for the design of energy efficiency policies, given the large and long-lasting consequences on energy consumption of infrequent purchase decisions of energy durables.	Jacopo Bonan, Cristina Cattaneo, Giovanna d'Adda and Massimo Tavoni
d1_s04_ra	d1_s04_ra	1 Sep 2022	15:45 - 16:45	Room A	Invited Session I: Theory driven experiments I 	SALVATORE	NUNNARI	4b2271	Bocconi University	Cognitive Imprecision and Strategic Behavior	We propose and experimentally test a theory of strategic behavior in which players encode and process game payoffs with cognitive noise. We focus on 2 × 2 coordination games that have multiple equilibria under complete information. Introducing cognitive noise generates a unique equilibrium. The model further predicts stochastic and context-dependent behavior: as volatility in the environment declines, perception of payoffs becomes less noisy and, thus, actions become more sensitive to payoffs. Context-dependence arises from an efficient use of limited cognitive resources. Our experimental data strongly support these predictions and reject a broad class of theories that do not predict context-dependence.	Cary Frydman
d1_s04_ra	d1_s04_ra	1 Sep 2022	15:45 - 16:45	Room A	Invited Session I: Theory driven experiments I 	JOËL	VAN DER WEELE	af8e0d	CREED - University of Amsterdam	Anticipatory Anxiety and Wishful Thinking	It is widely hypothesized that anxiety and worry about an uncertain future lead to the adoption of comforting beliefs or \wishful thinking". However, there is little direct causal evidence for this eect. In our experiment, participants perform a visual pattern recog- nition task where some patterns may result in the delivery of an electric shock, a proven way of inducing anxiety. Participants engage in signicant wishful thinking, as they are less likely to correctly identify patterns that they know may lead to a shock. Greater ambiguity of the pattern facilitates wishful thinking. Raising incentives for accuracy does not signicantly decrease it. 	Jan Engelmann, Maël Lebreton, Peter Schwardmann, Li-Ang Chang
d1_s05_rb	d1_s05_rb	1 Sep 2022	15:45 - 16:45	Room B	Invited Session II: Field experiments in education and child development 	SONIA	BHALOTRA	4ad867	Warwick University	Antidepressant Use and School Academic Achievement	We investigate impacts of antidepressant treatment on academic achievement among Danish children who are referred to a child psychiatrist. Leveraging quasi-random assignment of patients to psychiatrists with different prescribing tendencies, we find that treatment significantly increases test scores, especially in math and among girls. Treatment effects are larger among children of less educated mothers who, in general, are less likely to be treated, indicating negative selection on gains based on observables. However, there is positive selection on gains based on unobservables. Further analysis of marginal treatment effects and policy simulations indicate under-prescribing, contributing to controversy over the net benefits of antidepressants to children	Meltem Daysal, Nis Lydiksen, Mircea Trandafir
d1_s05_rb	d1_s05_rb	1 Sep 2022	15:45 - 16:45	Room B	Invited Session II: Field experiments in education and child development 	GIUSEPPE	SORRENTI	74d004	University of Amsterdam	The Causal Impact of Socio-Emotional Skills Training on Educational Success	 We study the long-term effects of a randomized intervention targeting children’s socio-emotional skills. The classroom-based intervention for primary school children has positive impacts that persist for over a decade. Treated children become more likely to complete academic high school and enroll in university. Two mechanisms drive these results. Treated children show fewer ADHD symptoms: they are less impulsive and less disruptive. They also attain higher grades, but they do not score higher on standardized tests. The long-term effects on educational attainment thus appear to be driven by changes in socio-emotional skills rather than cognitive skills. 	Zölitz, Ribeaud, Eisner
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	RO'I	ZULTAN	9b53a1	Ben-Gurion University of the Negev	Moral hazard and excess returns in markets	Stocks of firms with high managerial ownership are often underpriced and yield excess returns. Moral hazard provides a possible explanation for this phenomenon. Managerial holdings incentivize the manager-owner to increase the firm&rsquo;s value by exerting effort. If the stock price reflects this effort, the manager benefits from selling her stocks and withholding effort. In equilibrium, therefore, prices are maintained at a low level at which the manager is indifferent between exerting effort and selling. We provide evidence for this explanation in an experimental market. With moral hazard, stocks are underpriced, with prices converging towards equilibrium. We further test the implications of a disclosure policy. Making managerial transactions public&mdash;as required, for example, by United States federal law&mdash;has two effects. First, prices converge rapidly to equilibrium. Second, as prices respond to current managerial holdings, managers can extract money by creating a &ldquo;money pump,&rdquo; buying at low prices and selling at high prices repeatedly.	Lawrence Choo, Todd Kaplan and Ro'i Zultan
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	SELIN	ARSLANOGLU	aa1ac1	Tilburg Uinersity	Cooperation under Endogenous Institutions: Direct Democracy vs Representative Democracy	The experimental findings in the literature indicate that not only institutions (i.e., rules) but also how those institutions are chosen both affect human interaction. Many studies find that the effect of an institution on cooperative behaviour is more pronounced when it is chosen democratically than when it is imposed externally. Although it is well-documented in the literature that endogenously chosen institutions might be a better way to solve cooperation problems in social dilemma situations compared to exogenously imposed ones, it is not clear if there is a distinction in the performance of endogenous institutions in addressing those problems. Therefore, this experimental study aims to compare cooperative behaviour under the rules chosen by group members democratically and those decided by an elected representative. The differences in cooperation between direct and indirect democracies might be explained by social norms, legitimacy, or group characteristics.	Selin Arslanoglu
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	SVENJA	HIPPEL	7d067c	University of Bonn	A laboratory experiment on fairness preferences for sharing losses in insolvency	In insolvency proceedings claimants are to receive awards from a shrunken pie. Arguably, organizing this distributional conflict is the most important task of insolvency law. We study in a computerized experiment the distributional preferences of insolvency claimants about how to allocate a liquidation value smaller than the sum of pre-insolvency claims. In particular, under the veil of ignorance we elicit preferences for four different distribution mechanisms: (1) the proportionality rule, (2) the constrained equal awards rule, (3) the constrained equal losses rule, and (4) the Talmud rule. While all four rules capture egalitarian intuitions and may be subsumed under the pari passu principle, they do so in quite different ways. This raises the question of how these rules interact with peoples' fairness considerations. To the extent that preferences differ from the proportionality rule commonly employed in practice, our results raise questions about regulatory reform of insolvency law and similar rule-bodies governing conflicting claims problems.	Svenja Hippel, Sven Hoeppner
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	KAREN	HAUGE	a035ff	Ragnar Frisch Centre for Economic Research	Why people oppose trade institutions – On morality, fairness and risky actions	We investigate how moral considerations, background conditions, and risk can trigger resistance to implementing trading institutions. We provide survey results on moral opposition to trade on several goods and services like body organs, sex services, surrogate mothers, trade with developing nations, and trade with carbon emissions. Complementary experimental evidence allows identifying reasons for opposing trade going beyond pure moral considerations. We relate the opposition to trade in experimental and field contexts to an aversion to imposing risks on others. We then vary both background conditions and the riskiness of engaging in actual trade in the experiment. We show that distributional concerns primarily drive opposition to trade. Providing less information about individual background conditions and distributing gains from trade more equally alleviates opposition to trade.	Karen E. Hauge , Snorre Kverndokk , Andreas Lange
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	MILOŠ	FIŠAR	6b4948	Vienna University of Economics and Business & Masaryk University	The effects of ritualized behavior on economic decision making under stress	The direct, pragmatic effect of the ritual was questioned by researchers of both classic and recent periods, still, its indirect beneficent functions were documented in various cultural settings. Despite numerous observational and lab-based data demonstrating the beneficial effect of rituals on individual psychology and objective performance, rigorous studies documenting ritualistic action's impact on economic decision-making are absent. This study explores the effect of cultural rituals by measuring the effect of habituated ritualistic behavior in risk-taking, decision-making, and cognitive performance tasks. For this purpose, we designed three specifically modified tasks complemented by physiological and hormonal measures to address individual stress level responses in time.	Lubomir Cingl, Miloš Fišar, Jan Krátký, Radek Kundt, Eva Kundtová Klocová, Martin Lang, Klára Marečková, Tomasso Reggiani
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	CORNELIUS	SCHNEIDER	3b5973	University of Mannheim	(Mathematical) Complexity and Preferences for Taxation: The Case of Wealth Taxation	The individual capacity to form personal preferences constitutes an essential element of the democratic process. At the same time, policies with far-reaching consequences often require profound expertise. Taxation is such an example. Due to its complex character, bounded rationality might induce biases causing other outcomes than intended. This paper quantifies shifts in stated preferences for wealth taxation caused by misperceived burden consequences of commonly politically discussed tax parameters: tax allowances and tax rates. For this, we conducted a randomized survey experiment with over 1,200 respondents in Germany. In a 2 by 2 design, our respondents were randomly selected to indicate both their preferred tax allowance and tax rate for either a yearly or a one-time wealth tax. Our treatment group was provided with easy-to-understand information on the resulting effective lifetime tax burden for the respective instrument. We find the preferred effective tax rate to drop by almost 15 percentage points for a yearly wealth tax if our participants are fully informed, whereas we do not find this effect for the one-time wealth tax. In terms of informed preferences our respondents prefer the yearly wealth tax over a one time wealth tax if misperceptions are resolved: the preferred effective tax burden of a yearly wealth tax is about 25 percentage points higher (40.0% vs. 15.2%). While not being able to fully explain the source of this difference, we argue that both the total burden as well as the reasonability of single payments might be factors that form preferences for tax parameters.	Cornelius Schneider, Malte Chirvi, Hans-Peter Huber
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	SANTIAGO	SANCHEZ-PAGES	b7b549	KING'S COLLEGE LONDON	Braggart or humble? The effect of self-reports on performance	An extensive literature has studied both in the field and in the lab the effects on performance of providing absolute and relative verifiable feedback, finding mixed results. Another branch of the literature has studied the effects of non-verifiable centrally-provided feedback. This literature finds that principals do strategically distort the feedback they provide in order to elicit more effort from their agents; the effects of non-verifiable feedback on performance compared to verifiable feedback are also mixed.  But, to the best of our knowledge, no study has explored the effects of performance information provided in a decentralized manner. In this paper, we experimentally study the effects on performance of self-reports, that is non-verifiable reports made by peers about their own performance. In our main treatment, participants perform several rounds of a real-effort task in groups of four. At the end of each round, they send a report about their own performance in that round. Self-reports are made public within the group. We vary whether the payment scheme is individual or group-based. Our results show that most self-reports are truthful; only about 15% of self-reports are untrue, including both instances of over and underreporting, although the latter is less frequent, especially under group payment. These are significant misreporting rates given that lying about one&rsquo;s performance has no direct monetary implications. This suggests that misreporting is used to manage social image.  We also observe that self-reports do not have performance effects compared to the control treatment where self-reports are absent. However, the content of the self-reports is relevant.  Higher reports by others are detrimental to own performance. This effect is stronger under group payment. Finally, we exploit the feature that in our design individuals with identical (different) performance may see themselves differently (identically) ranked within their group due to misreporting.  By focusing on these participants we 1) corroborate that better performance by others decreases own performance and 2) that receiving good news, e.g. being ranked relatively better than one should, increases performance.    	Maria Cubel, Ann-Kathrin Koessler
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	NICCOLÒ	ZACCARIA	7c6c4a	Tilburg University	Misconfidence and Price Stickiness	We design a novel experiment to study the role of higher-order beliefs on price stickiness in a nominal framing. Two players receive a signal about the aggregate price of an experimental market. Player 1 reports her beliefs about the aggregate price, and Player 2 reports her beliefs about the beliefs of Player 1. Midway through the experiment, a monetary shock is implemented, and we focus the analysis on the expectations in the post-shock phase. Given a certain prior distribution, misconfidence is defined as an agent believing her opponents to form biased beliefs about the prior and identifies a lack of trust in the opponents&rsquo; abilities. The goal of this work is to understand to which extent misconfidence causes stickiness of price expectations. The design allows us to measure the wedge between first and second order expectations, shedding light on the type of contexts where these differences can arise. Previous studies have focused on the importance on price dynamics of the strategic features of an experimental market, but no study has tried to directly address and disentangle higher order expectations in these contexts.	Niccolò Zaccaria
d1_s06_ra	d1_s06_ra	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room A	Lightning III	PAOLO	CROSETTO	44c740	INRAE - GAEL	Eliciting beliefs when the distribution matters: a horse race of elicitation interfaces	We develop an intuitive, click-and-drag interface to elicit continuous belief distributions of any shape. We test this interface against the state of the art in the experimental economics literature -- a text-based interface and multiple sliders -- and in the online forecasting industry -- the Metaculus, online belief aggregator interface. We collect quantitative data on the speed and accuracy of reported beliefs in a series of induced-value scenarios varying by granularity, shape, and time constraints. We also collect subjective data on perceived difficulty and understanding, as well as homegrown beliefs on a series of trivia questions. The aim of this paper is twoflod. On the one hand, to document and measure which belief elicitation interface is more intuitive, easy to use, and yields precise beliefs. On the other, to provide a practical example of how experimental economics can move forward in the data-driven validation of its tools. Further, we provide a free and open source, ready to use and scalable oTree plugin of our click-and-grad interface, as well as for the other interfaces.	Paolo Crosetto, Thomas De Haan
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	TIM	LOHSE	0375d7	Berlin School of Economics and Law	The Dark Side of Performance Evaluations: Males‘ Tendency for Over-Competitiveness	We modify the setting by Niederle and Vesterlund (2007) such that subjects can choose their opponent in the tournament stage based on information about past performance. There is no monetary (dis)incentive to choose a particularly (weak) strong opponent, but they can receive non-rank-order evaluations regarding their own competition behavior and the level of strength of the chosen opponent. We observe that subjects increase their performance when knowing that they get such feedback. Some choose an opponent with an above median performance and then achieve a significantly higher performance themselves. We also find evidence that this treatment effect can be explained by a gender-specific reaction to the appraisal scheme. Men show a performance increase, which is more than three times higher as compared to women. This finding is particularly striking given that monetary incentives remain the same. Thus, men&rsquo;s aptitude for a stronger competition seems to be triggered by the evaluation scheme. In addition to that, we observe that around 30 (13) percent of all men (women) select opponents who are even stronger than themselves. We interpret this as men&rsquo;s tendency to &lsquo;over compete&rsquo;. From the perspective of a firm, such a behavior is detrimental. In fact, women have a significantly higher chance of winning the actual tournament. In sum, our results urge caution when using evaluation schemes.	Tim Lohse, Emmanuel Peterle, Holger Rau
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	ISMAEL	RODRIGUEZ-LARA	43aa5b	UNIVERSIDAD DE MÁLAGA	Gender differences in task performance and expectations	Ductor, Goyal and Prummer (Review of Economics and Statistics, 2018) document gender differences in productivity in economics across 30 years. They argue that these differences can be explained by differences in the  co-authorship networks of men and women. Our goal is to test whether differences in the co-authorship network of men and women can be explained by men and women having different expectations regarding the performance of others. In this paper, we examine gender differences in task performance and expectations in four different tasks (emotion-recognition, verbal ability, mathematical ability, and mental rotation). According to previous literature, these tasks differ in the (ex-ante) expectation that women will perform perform better than men. We find support for the hypothesis that women perform better than men when eliciting the beliefs of participants in the task and external observers. The use of monetary incentives to elicit expectations does not matter for the accuracy of the reported beliefs (i.e., we do not find support for a social desirability bias or demand-effect). These findings highlight that differences in network could be explained by homophile or discrimination, rather than expecting different performance from men and women.	Cabrales, A., Ductor, L., Rascón, E., Rodriguez-Lara, I.
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	JAKOB	MÖLLER	8ef329	Wirtschafsuniversität Wien	Backlash against Women in Competition	The gender pay gap remains persistent in most developed countries and a large proportion of the gap cannot be explained by observable factors. The repeated finding that women compete less than men has been suggested as a possible factor contributing to the lower wages of women and policy measures have been implemented to encourage women to enter more highly-competitive, well-paid, and often male-stereotypical careers. However, literature on backlash against agentically acting women suggests that women who choose to compete in male-typed domains may receive punishment for breaking social norms. With this experiment we investigate how people respond to income inequalities arising from competition between men and women when competition is voluntary and competitors act agentically.	Simone Haeckl, Jakob Möller, Anita Zednik
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	EVA	RANEHILL	43f80d	DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS, UNIVERSITY OF GOTHENBURG; DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS, LUND UNIVERSITY	Gender Identity and Economics	To date, economic research exploring gaps in economic behavior and outcomes has, with a few prominent exceptions, focused on differences by biological sex. In this paper we study the value of incorporating richer, subjective, self-assessed notions of gender identity into economics. We first validate a new short measure of gender identity. We then provide experimental evidence on the extent to which this measure adds explanatory power beyond that of a binary indicator for biological sex in understanding gender gaps in economic preferences. Finally, we incorporate our measure of gender identity into a number of surveys, and in a similar way assess the extent to which our measure of gender identity adds explanatory value, beyond that of biological sex, to gender gaps in educational and labor market outcomes. 	Anne Ardila Brenøe, Lea Heursen, Eva Ranehill, and Roberto A. Weber
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	REGINE	OEXL	5587c5	University of Innsbruck	The effect of economic distress on discriminatory behavior	Distress caused by the economic environment is thought to lead to higher levels of discriminatory behavior. If true, an economic shock would affect those individuals that typically face discriminatory behavior indirectly through an increase in discrimination and directly by economic distress itself. Using an incentivized online survey, we test the causal relationship between discriminatory behaviour and the negative economic shock resulting from the restrictions due to COVID-19. The nature of this shock results in a nearly exogenous assignment of economic distress, reducing possible selection effects. We find no differences in the revealed discriminatory preferences between those individuals who were and were not affected by the shock. This holds independently on whether the shock leads to a salary reduction or a job loss. Counter to claims made elsewhere, this finding supports the notion that preferences related to discriminatory behavior are likely invariant to economic conditions.	Anna Rita Bennato, Glenn Dutcher, Regine Oexl
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	RAMON	COBO REYES	7e524c	American University of Sharjah	Anticipated discrimination and wage negotiation: An experimental study	This paper proposes a field experiment to study whether potential perceived discrimination affects wage negotiation in a labor-market setting. People interested in an advertised position can apply using an online portal. After the initial application, participants are randomly allocated to one of two treatments. Half of the applicants are asked to provide some information in a standardized curriculum vitae template, including full name, surname, and a requested hourly wage. The second half of the applicants are asked to provide their initials rather than full name, and the requested hourly wage. Female applicants ask for a lower salary than males when the full name is revealed. However, the requested salary from females increases by 60% when they provide only the initials. As a consequence, the demanded wage gap completely disappears when the gender of the applicant is not public. 	GARY CHARNESS, RAMÓN COBO-REYES, SANTIAGO GARCÍA-COUTO, SIMONE MERAGLIA,  ÁNGELA SÁNCHEZ
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	PHUC	PHUNG	14b752	Tilburg University	Emotional Discrimination	While ethnic discrimination is still a major concern, not much is known about the role of  emotions on discrimination itself. We conduct an online experiment where native Dutch participants, playing responder role, receive a low offer from a proposer with either native Dutch name or ethnic minority name, and have to decide whether to accept to reject this low offer. Their emotions can be triggered in some treatments where they actually experience the low offer before making a choice. We find that the responders do not discriminate nor react emotionally, as we do not find significant treatment effects on the rejection rate to the low offer.	Phuc Phung, Sigrid Suetens, Boris van Leeuwen
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	RUSTAMDJAN	HAKIMOV	e9eb48	University of Lausanne & WZB Social Science Center Berlin	Algorithmic hiring decisions: preferences of workers and delegation of managers.	<br>We run an online experiment to study ways to overcome algorithm aversion.  Participants are either in the role of workers or of managers. Workers will either be assigned to the baseline, treatment 1 or treatment 2. Managers will either be assigned to the baseline or the treatment. Workers perform three real-effort tasks: task 1, task 2 and the job task. They must choose whether they prefer hiring decisions between themself and another worker to be made by a participant in the role of a manager or an algorithm. They will get paid if they are hired in one random pair of workers they belong to. They know that the manager will get paid if they hire the best worker at the job task out of a random pair of workers they have made a hiring decision for. In the workers baseline and treatment 1, the managers and the algorithm will base their hiring decision on the genders of the workers and their task 1 and task 2 performances. In the workers' treatment 1, before deciding between the manager and the algorithm, workers are informed about exact formula algorithm will use for forecasting productivity (Algorithm transparency). In the workers' treatment 2, the algorithm will base its hiring decisions on the task 1 and task 2 performances of the workers but not on their gender.  Managers must always make 20 hiring decisions between pairs of workers. They can see the gender of the workers and their task 1 and task 2 performances. We elicit for how many of the 20 decisions they believe they have hired the best worker of the pair. They must then decide whether they want to delegate the hiring decisions to the algorithm. If they do, their payoff will depend on the algorithm's hiring decision, not theirs.  In the managers' treatment, managers will get a feedback about their over/under or well-calibrated confidence before the decision whether to delegate the hiring decisions to the algorithm.  Main hypotheses (causal) : H1 (causal effect of algorithm transparency on algorithm aversion): A higher share of workers will prefer to be hired by the algorithm (rather than by managers) in Treatment 1 of workers than in the Baseline workers. H2 (causal effect of knowing the algorithm uses gender to make its hiring decision on algorithm aversion): A higher share of workers will prefer to be hired by the algorithm (rather than by managers) in Treatment 2 of workers than in the Baseline workers. H3 (causal effect of managers&rsquo; confidence on the delegation to algorithms): A higher share of managers will delegate the hiring decisions to the algorithm in the Treatment managers than in the Baseline managers. The effect will be driven by those managers who were overconfident in their number of correct hires.  	Marie-Pierre Dargnies, Rustamdjan Hakimov, Dorothea Kübler
d1_s06_rb	d1_s06_rb	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room B	Lightning IV	MICHELE	BELOT	d76d84	Cornell University	Taste and Prejudice: An Experiment	This paper examines the role of prejudice against a "non-mainstream" good, specifically a vegan food product. We conduct a randomized controlled experiment and examine how people&rsquo;s valuations of the product is affected by tasting the product and by prior information about the nature of the product. We  contrast conditions where participants have the opportunity to purchase a vegan product and vary (1) whether they can taste the product beforehand, (2) whether they are informed the product is vegan and (3) the timing of when they receive information about the nature of the product. We find that providing an opportunity to taste results in a substantial increase in valuation. Interestingly, we find that conditional on tasting, providing information about the product increases valuation relative to not providing information.	Michele Belot, Adelson Teh
d1_s06_rc	d1_s06_rc	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room C	Public Goods II	XIN	ZHANG	4648d4	University of Bologna	Comparisons of Two Catch-Quota Management Regimes: An Experimental Investigation	We introduce the heterogeneity of harvesting capacity and uncertain recruitment stocks into a novel quasi-continuous time experimental environment with a contemporaneous price externality. The allocation and coordination of harvesting efforts under both common pool (CP) management and individual quotas (IQ) management are investigated. We show that the CP-induced race-to-fish pushes subjects with a low capacity to reduce their harvesting efforts, sacrificing landings to maintain a profitable fish price, which leads to an extreme income gap compared to subjects with a high capacity. IQ management, however, narrows the income gap by keeping a high market price and protecting low-capacity subjects with secured individual quota.	Zhi Li, Xin Zhang
d1_s06_rc	d1_s06_rc	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room C	Public Goods II	MOUMITA	DEB	eb5f7d	University of Birmingham	Information Acquisition in a Threshold Public Goods Game	Threshold uncertainty has been previously shown to impede the efficient provision of threshold public goods. Do groups perform better when their members can acquire information on the location of the threshold? We conduct an online experiment on threshold public good provision where participants can simultaneously choose to buy private clues about the location of the threshold. Each group contains two low-risk and two high-risk members who differ in their expected loss from failing to reach the threshold. We find that groups reach the threshold less frequently when group members can acquire information than when no information acquisition is possible. We attribute this to optimism: individuals acquire too little information to adequately update their priors about the true threshold value, resulting in too low contributions. Low-risk members are disproportionately responsible for the failure of collective action. Our findings suggest that giving individuals a possibility to learn via private information acquisition is insufficient in solving the problem of threshold uncertainty. 	Siddhartha Bandyopadhyay, Moumita Deb, Johannes Lohse and Rebecca McDonald
d1_s06_rc	d1_s06_rc	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room C	Public Goods II	CARLO	GALLIER	93e03d	Free University of Bozen-Bolzano	Collective minimum contributions to address the ratchet effect in social dilemmas	How to ratchet up? This question is of utmost importance to avoid dangerous climate change, since the Paris Agreement relies on a dynamic incentive scheme that prescribes nationally determined climate ambitions to ratchet up, i.e., increase over time. However, there are doubts regarding the effectiveness of the incentive scheme in its current design. The latest round of nationally determined contributions falls short of its expectations and Gallier &amp; Sturm (2021, JEBO) show that the effect of such an incentive scheme in a repeated social dilemma situation could be detrimental, because it increases the risk of being free-ridden and sets incentives to strategically restrict cooperation in the beginning. We testbed whether collective minimum contribution levels are sufficient to reduce the risk of being free-ridden in a repeated social dilemma situation when contributions have to ratchet up and, thereby, counteract the incentives to strategically restrict cooperation. We test two different minimum contribution mechanisms that differ in their rigor, i.e., whether the minimum contribution levels are binding. Our results show that binding minimum contributions could improve the effectiveness of the incentive scheme, especially when participants have time to learn and coordinate.	Marius Alt, Carlo Gallier, Martin Kesternich, Bodo Sturm
d1_s06_rc	d1_s06_rc	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room C	Public Goods II	ALEXANDER	DZIONARA	121cd2	Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz	Choosing the pen or the sword? Communication as an endogenous institutional choice in public goods games	Communication is ubiquitous in society, a feature of many institutional settings and is shown to be an effective tool in overcoming social dilemmas. Despite this, communication has received little attention as an institutional feature in the literature on endogenous institutional choices. As communication and peer-sanctioning have been shown to increase cooperation rates in social dilemmas, the question arises: which institutional component do people prefer and are they willing to incur a cost to add the second component if the other is part of the existing institutional framework? To answer this question, I conduct a laboratory experiment that investigates endogenous institutional selection in a multi-phase multi-round public goods game. In the experiment participants choose between two of the following three institutional settings: (a) the opportunity to communicate in a group chat, (b) an informal peer sanctioning mechanism, or (c) both but with a small price.  The results of the experiment show that the pure communication environment is preferred almost universally over the other two settings. When participants are faced with the choice between a pure punishment institution and adding a group chat for a price, many select to do so at least once. After communication, cooperation rates increase. Overall, participants prefer communication over sanctioning and thus the endogenous emergence of sanctioning institutions found in the previous literature might not arise in the presence of communication opportunities. This finding helps to shed light on the absence of direct sanctioning institutions in many real-world social dilemma situations.	Alexander Dzionara
d1_s06_rc	d1_s06_rc	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room C	Public Goods II	LUCA	PANACCIONE	bb743a	Sapienza Università di Roma	Going Beyond Suffering -An Experiment whose Rewards Increase with Contributions	In public good provision even increasing marginal incentive to contribute may not suffice to render low levels of total contributions efficient: contributors may have to go beyond a region of suffering before gaining from contributions. This requires coordination when no single contributor can guarantee "going beyond suffering". We captures this in a stylized way by a public good game with decreasing freeriding incentives for contributions although total benefits decrease increasing and compensating the initial losses. The public good game is experimentally implemented as a one-off interaction with discrete contribution levels via random strangers rematching. We expected and confirm heterogeneity across rematching groups, most converging across time to general freeriding and few going "beyond the region of suffering".	Daniela Di Cagno, Werner Güth, Francesca Marazzi, Luca Panaccione
d1_s06_rd	d1_s06_rd	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room D	Labor II	ELDAR	DADON	bd647a	Ben-Gurion university of the Negev	Goodhart's law in the labor market: signal structure, strategies, and productivity	Managers observe worker production to inform compensation decisions. Intuitively, more observability allows managers to improve the compensation schemes to incentivize workers better. Nonetheless, incorporating quantitative production measures into the observed signal incentivizes workers to adapt their effort allocation to enhance the signal at the expense of efficiency. Thus, a richer signal can be associated with lower productivity.<br><br>For example, working from home entails lower observability compared to office work. Consequently, office workers may prioritize time-consuming tasks to increase their observed work hours.<br><br>We test this hypothesis in a controlled laboratory experiment. We find that removing quantitative information from the signal leads to more efficient strategies and higher productivity. Enriching the signal, however, does not have the opposite effect.	Eldar Dadon, Marie Claire Villeval, Ro'i Zultan
d1_s06_rd	d1_s06_rd	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room D	Labor II	EDMUND	BAKER	cfd074	FAU-Erlangen-Nürnberg	Social Media in Recruitment	In the last 15 years, the number of recruiters using social media has expanded from 10 to 90 percent. Despite this dramatic change we know relatively little about how recruiters use social media and how much weight they put on social media information relative to traditional information sources. We create a recruitment screening task on an online crowdsourcing platform. Our evaluators rate candidates after viewing CVs and social media data. We find candidates whose social media indicate mental health problems receive lower ratings by an amount equivalent to the effect of having a Bachelor&rsquo;s degree. Surprisingly, those with no social media presence at all suffer an even greater reduction in ratings. Those with an unappealing yet typical social media presence greater still by an amount equivalent to 10 years of work experience. Our study demonstrates the substantial (and likely increasing) role of social media as a costly signal between workers and potential employers.	Edmund Baker, Veronika Grimm, Yuval Ofek-Shanny
d1_s06_rd	d1_s06_rd	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room D	Labor II	TOM	LANE	5acd32	University of Nottingham Ningbo China	Failure of Unravelling Theory? A Natural Field Experiment on Voluntary Quality Disclosure	Classic &lsquo;unravelling&rsquo; theory holds that buyers should treat with maximal scepticism sellers who withhold verifiable information relating to their quality, as buyers infer from such non-disclosure that the seller possesses the lowest possible quality. This study is the first to use a natural field experiment to test this proposition, and the first to test it in a labour market context. We sent out 12,301 job applications, varying the information on degree classification &ndash; a signal of academic quality &ndash; that the applicant presented to the employer. Our results do not support unravelling theory. Applications which left degree classification undisclosed were significantly more likely to receive positive responses from employers than those disclosing the lowest possible degree classification. Employers treated non-disclosing applicants similarly to those disclosing mid-scale classifications, suggesting the extent to which adverse inference is drawn from missing information is limited.	Tom Lane and Minghai Zhou
d1_s06_rd	d1_s06_rd	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room D	Labor II	STELLA	SIMONS	9566b1	RWTH Aachen (Chair of organization)	Make a Difference – An Experiment on the Effectiveness of Performance Rating Policies	Performance evaluations by supervisors are frequently used in organizations as a basis for bonus and promotion decisions. Though, these appraisals are often prone to supervisors&rsquo; biases (e.g. leniency bias) that result in ratings that seem not sufficiently differentiated. Berger et al. (2013) could show that forcing supervisors to differentiate in the subjective performance evaluations by implementing a forced distribution system may increase worker productivity. However, forced distribution systems pose a variety of other problems. In a laboratory experiment we investigate two alternative rating policies which aim to foster differentiation and thus productivity. Firstly, the supervisors were simply advised to differentiate across different appraisal levels. We find that this simple recommendation results in less lenient and compressed performance ratings and increases workers&rsquo; performance. However, compliance with the advice diminishes over the course of the experiment and performance differences disappear. Secondly, we analyzed how the supervisors evaluate the workers&rsquo; performance when the rewards, which are tied to ratings, may not exceed a certain budget. We detect that specifying a financial budget mitigates the leniency and centrality bias and increases workers&rsquo; performance. Again, the performance differences wear off over the course of the experiment.	Johannes Berger, Christine Harbring, Dirk Sliwka and Stella Simons
d1_s06_rd	d1_s06_rd	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room D	Labor II	BLANCA	TENA ESTRADA	cbb059	University of Kassel	Influence of Unconditional Endowments and Sharing Opportunity on the Performance of Effort Tasks: A Lab-in-the-Field Experiment on UBI with the Unemployed	A universal basic income (UBI) would be a guaranteed income floor for both the employed and the unemployed, from which economic theory predicts a gain in bargaining power as well as a disincentive to work. For high earners, the increase in taxes that may be necessary to fund this program would decrease their motivation to earn. To assess these aspects, we conducted a lab-in-the-field experiment at the State Employment Service office in Spain. The unemployed participants received either an initial unconditional endowment, framed under the logic of the solidarity condition of UBI (UBI treatment) &ndash; to examine the taxes&rsquo; effect &ndash; or as a participation fee (FEE), or no initial endowment (NON-UBI). Subsequently, they faced one default randomized task from a set of four paid real effort tasks. To study bargaining power, they could change the task up to three times and/or skip all tasks and conclude the experiment. In the FEE treatment, they yielded the highest earnings. While no statistically significant difference in earnings was found between the FEE and the NON-UBI treatments, the FEE and the UBI differed. A likely reason could be a crowding-out of motivation by the pressure to reciprocate without believing in other participants&rsquo; deservingness of the UBI. In addition, the results reveal that females change tasks more frequently than males.	Blanca Tena Estrada & Nhat Luong
d1_s06_re	d1_s06_re	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room E	Field Experiments in Education	ANNALISA	LOVIGLIO	bff002	Università di Bologna	Orienta|ME: Measuring the effects of a peer-to-peer mentoring program on university choices and performance	Enrollment decisions play a major role in shaping future labor market and life outcomes. Recent contributions have shown that non-pecuniary motives such as expectations about performance, social life, or enjoyment of the subjects taught are key determinants of the choices. However many students have limited access to first hand information and may have inaccurate beliefs. We are conducting a RCT  aimed at providing more information about university life and the study environment, especially to those high school students who are undecided among different majors and might lack access to positive role models. Treated high school students are matched with students enrolled at the University of Bologna in STEM or Economics programs. Mentors meet their mentees online, share their experience and help them navigate the enrolment process. We expect that treated students will acquire more accurate beliefs about the field of study of their mentor, they will be more likely to enroll in the same field, and they will feel more confident about their enrolment choice. Moreover, we expect them to perform at least as well as the control group, and dropout or change major less during their first year of college.	Maria Bigoni, Stefania Bortolotti, Annalisa Loviglio
d1_s06_re	d1_s06_re	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room E	Field Experiments in Education	PABLO	BRANAS GARZA	a2ccc8	Universidad Loyola Andalucía	Are teenagers consistent? Evidence from experiments in secondary schools	There is an increasing interest on the population of teenagers among economists. Using specifically designed new experimental tasks, this paper reports evidence on teenagers decision making. Subjects (n=2586) completed three well-known tasks in a lab-in-the-field experiment: time preferences (MPL), cognitive abilities (CRT, financial skills) and risk preferences (Holt-Laury). Results show that teenagers are highly consistent when answering the time and risk preferences tasks, but struggle with cognitive abilities. We find that the quality of results improve with age and that performances are similar between genders. Importantly, we observe that time and risk preferences are not correlated, stable across ages and similar between genders. We also find a critical role of CRT and financial abilities on consistency.	Benjamin Prissé, Antonio Alfonso-Costillo, Pablo Brañas-Garza, María José Vázquez-De Francisco
d1_s06_re	d1_s06_re	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room E	Field Experiments in Education	RANVEIG	FALCH	46af51	Norwegian School of Economics	Peer Perceptions and Students' Investments in Schoolwork	Students' study time is a key input in their education production function; however, little is known about the determinants of this input. In this paper, we investigate whether students' study time is impacted by peers, and we focus on a novel channel for peer effects in study time, namely beliefs about peers' behavior. Based on a randomized controlled trial, we provide incentivized evidence that middle school students largely underestimate how much time their classmates spend on schoolwork, and that re-calibrating students' beliefs with an information treatment increases study time. Building on the partial population design of our experiment, we further show that changes in the beliefs and behaviors of treated students have positive spillover effects on non-treated students within the same classroom, and we discuss likely mechanisms.	Ranveig Falch and Fanny Landaud
d1_s06_re	d1_s06_re	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room E	Field Experiments in Education	DOMINIQUE	CAPPELLETTI	2c92e8	FBK-IRVAPP	Math ability, gender stereotypes about math ability, and educational choices - Combining experimental and survey data	The underrepresentation of females in STEM fields is a major concern of policymakers and researchers as it negatively affects productivity growth and exacerbates labour market inequality. In countries where children are tracked in educational trajectories from high school (as in Italy, 8th grade), it becomes crucial to understand what drives gendered pathways at the outset, before educational segregation starts. Collecting and combining experimental and survey data from a sample of Italian 8th graders, we find that (i) perceived disadvantageous comparisons with peers' math performance and (ii) the holding of more gender-stereotyped (incentivised) beliefs about math ability negatively affect  the likelihood that girls choose a math-intensive track during high school.  	Dominique Cappelletti, Maria Vittoria Levati, Matteo Ploner
d1_s06_re	d1_s06_re	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room E	Field Experiments in Education	MARIA	BIGONI	c7b702	University of Bologna	Mindful parenting and children's socio-emotional skills and preferences	Parental investments are a key factor in child development and play a major role in shaping both soft skills — socio-emotional and cognitive abilities — and economic preferences. Yet, parents may fail in recognizing the importance of their role in the first years of life of their children or may struggle in finding the most effective parenting styles. We developed an app- based intervention aimed at fostering positive parenting among caregivers of 4-5 years old children. At endline, we test the effect of this intervention on children’s socio-emotional skills and economic preferences, via standardized psychometric tests and economic experiments. Our data allow to test for different mediators, including parents' time investment, their economic preferences, and their ability to accept and empower the autonomy of the child.	Bigoni, Bortolotti, Celadin, Fort, Guarini, Monfardini, Sansavini, and Suttora
d1_s06_rf	d1_s06_rf	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room F	Games & Information	MIGUEL ANGEL	MARTINEZ-CARRASCO	23b171	Universidad de los Andes - Bogotá	Would I Lie to You? An experiment on project selection with biased advice	<br>When agents with private information compete for resources from a principal and are biased towards their own favored projects (e.g., a CEO decides which division man- ager&rsquo;s project to fund) an agency problem arises. However, possible future interaction can mitigate this problem even without reputational concerns, since an agent who in- duces acceptance of a low-valued project today consumes resources that crowd out even better opportunities that may arrive in the future. We study this organizational environment both theoretically and using laboratory experiments. Specifically, we study the incentives of competing agents to strategically communicate about their own favored project&rsquo;s value (high or low) to an uninformed decision maker when new projects arrive over time. After observing all advice from agents, the decision maker decides which project to adopt, if any. If no project is adopted subjects enter the next period with new independently drawn projects and continue indefinitely until one project is adopted. We hypothesize and find that truth telling is easier to support the smaller is the benefit from a low-quality project or the more likely it is to occur, but harder to support as agent competition grows. Interestingly, results fail to converge more closely to model predictions over repeated play, largely driven by increasingly pessimistic manager beliefs.	Miguel Angel Martinez-Carrasco, John Hamman and Eric Schmidbauer
d1_s06_rf	d1_s06_rf	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room F	Games & Information	YAN	XU	571eb5	University of Vienna	Commitment and communication in Bayesian persuasion: theory and experiment	In many scenarios, a persuader (she) has conflicting interests from a decision-maker (DM, or he) and attempts to influence his action. Kamenica and Gentzkow (2011) pioneered the literature on Bayesian persuasion, wherein persuasion is achieved by strategically designing DM's information environment. We consider a variant scenario wherein the persuader has superior information over the decision-maker and communicates with the DM. We further explore theoretically and experimentally how the persuader's private information and the communication protocols affect the effectiveness of persuasion and the information transmission. In our setting, the persuader commits to a designed information structure but privately observes the signal realization, and she can exchange her private information about the signal with the DM via cheap talk or partially verifiable messages. The DM receives the message and chooses a state-contingent bet that determines the payoffs for both players. We design a laboratory persuasion task in which the persuader can use a simple graphic coloring task to influence a DM's conditional probability inference, and further the DM's bet decision. We find that (1) the persuader's choices of information structure are in line with theoretical predictions, showing a tradeoff between effectiveness and informativeness of the information design; (2) the DMs can predict the persuader's information design in the correct direction, but quantitatively not all of them respond with optimal actions; (3) the observed treatment effects are consistent with the theory, in that a combination of private signal observation with low credibility in communication reduces the effectiveness of persuasion, but increases the information transmission.	Yun Wang, Yan Xu
d1_s06_rf	d1_s06_rf	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room F	Games & Information	ERIC	SPURLINO	b92a5d	New York University	Rationally Inattentive and Strategically (Un)Sophisticated: An Experimental Study of Mistakes in Games	This paper studies whether individuals are able to (1) anticipate the information acquisition of opponents in a strategic game, and (2) best respond to this when acquiring their own costly information. I utilize the simplest possible strategic setting in which two players must decide whether to agree to a trade of unknown quality that is ex-ante optimal, but is ex-post sub-optimal for one player. In such a game, one's own information acquisition strategy must take into account the information strategy of their opponent--the benefits of information vary tightly with how often their opponent is making a mistake (i.e. trading when sub-optimal, or not trading when optimal). Using a theoretical model from the rational inattention literature, I generate sharp behavioral predictions that differ based on the strategic sophistication of players. Players of low sophistication do not play as if there opponent is rationally acquiring information, while players of high sophistication understand that their opponent is indeed rationally inattentive.  I then test these predictions in a lab experiment, which uses a real effort perception task in the setting described above, where I exogenously manipulate the difficulty of this task (and thus the cost of information acquisition) of both the player and their opponent. In addition, I elicit beliefs on the information acquisition ability of their opponent, and measure the attentional ability of each player using a separate decision-making task. Combined, these measures allow me to assess the heterogeneity in the ability to anticipate and best respond to strategic incentives via information acquisition.	Eric Spurlino
d1_s06_rf	d1_s06_rf	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room F	Games & Information	RAJIB	PRASAD	92d296	jawaharlal nehru university	Effect of (cheap talk) communication in heterogeneous group contests with incomplete information: An experimental analysis	Costless pre-play communication has been shown to effectively facilitate within-group coordination. This study examines how behavior in inter-group contests is altered  when players can communicate within their group through cost-less non-binding messages. We model a Tullock contest where there are two possible types of groups that are heterogeneous in the incentives they face and players only know the probability of their opponent being of a particular group type. The competing two groups are heterogeneous with respect to the prize value and unit effort level of cost. Then in the lab experiment uisng  oTree, we test our results and investigate the group behavior under communication protocol. We also compare results between complete information and incomplete information. We find that under cheap talk communication, the over-bidding in group contests can significantly be reduced and the optimal group effort converges to the theoretical predictions. To our best knowledge, this investigation is probably the first study to study group contests with incomplete information using the cheap talk communication.	Rajib Prasad, Sujoy Chakravorty
d1_s06_rf	d1_s06_rf	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room F	Games & Information	ANDREAS	ZIEGLER	0401a8	University of Amsterdam	Optimal (mis-)coordination under uncertainty: Testing information design in the laboratory	<br>Governments, politicians, central banks, or private organizations are frequently challenged with the task of convincing their audience to take a specific action. When persuading an audience, a sender may benefit from adapting her communication strategy to the strategic environment of the receivers. In particular, the sender may want to vary the degree of strategic uncertainty between receivers. I test whether the optimal communication strategy involves public signals, with minimal strategic uncertainty, when the strategic environment of the receivers features strategic complements and private signals with strategic substitutes. This prediction arises in models of information design (Bergemann and Morris, 2019). In a laboratory experiment, I test (i) how the optimal structure depends on the receivers&rsquo; strategic environment and (ii) whether obedience, which captures receivers&rsquo; incentives to trust signals, is predictive of receivers&rsquo; following behavior. Receivers follow 78% of recommendations and trust signals more strongly when incentives to follow increase, consistent with theoretical predictions. Contrary to theoretical predictions, I find that public communication strategies perform at least as well as private strategies, independent of the strategic environment of the receivers. While I detect the strategic advantage of public structures in games of strategic complements, minimizing strategic uncertainty between receivers with public messaging enhances persuasion more generally.	Andreas Ziegler
d1_s06_rg	d1_s06_rg	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room G	Games & Behavior	ERICA	ORDALI	7e627f	IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca	Dopaminergic and serotonergic genetic variants predict (actions and expectation of) cooperation and punishment	Recent empirical contributions have explored the relation between genetic profiles and behaviors in some traditional economic games, inspired by the growing interest in linking several demeanors with particular genetic assets. In this paper, we are the first to explore simultaneously the relation between specific genes of the fundamental dopaminergic and serotonergic pathways and both behaviors and beliefs (about others&rsquo; behaviors) in the Public Goods Game. Specifically, we conducted an online experiment on a genotyped population whose participants played a Public Goods Game without punishment and, subsequently, one with a punishment option. Participants&rsquo; behaviors and beliefs were both elicited in an incentive-compatible manner. We found that: (i) the T/T genotype of \emph{5-HTR1B}-rs13212041 goes with an expectation of less antisocial and spiteful punishment; (ii) the L/L genotype of 5-HTTLPR is related with smaller contributions to the public good in the absence of the punishment option and (iii) with expectations of smaller contributions by others in the same setup; (iv) the A/A (Met/Met) genotype of \emph{COMT}-rs4680 (Val158Met) is associated with expectations of smaller contributions in the presence of punishment. Overall, the results indicate that, when studying the effects of genes in economic games, the focus should also be on their effect through beliefs rather than just directly on behavior. In fact, it appears that the presence of a specific genetic variant links with the beliefs about others' behavior, which are themselves highly correlated with the subsequent action of the subject.	Pablo Marcos-Prieto, Erica Ordali, Veronica Mariotti, Sara Palumbo, Stefano Vellucci, Emiliano Ricciardi, Pietro Pietrini, Silvia Pellegrini, Leonardo Boncinelli, Ennio Bilancini
d1_s06_rg	d1_s06_rg	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room G	Games & Behavior	LEONIDAS	SPILIOPOULOS	e03f3e	Max Planck Institute for Human Development	On the evolution of heuristics and bounded rational behavior in random games	I systematically explore whether evolutionary dynamics support simple heuristics, more sophisticated behavior of varying levels of Theory of Mind or substantive rationality in 3,060 different strategic environments. The steady-state distributions of strategies are influenced by the complexity costs of implementing them and the environmental characteristics such as the size of the game, payoff uncertainty and the degree of mutual interest or conflict between players. Evolution rarely selects for substantive rationality (Nash equilibrium), favoring instead a plethora of bounded-rational strategies with varying levels of theory of mind (Level-k models) and other simple heuristics, such as maxmin or maximization of joint payoffs to players. There exist non-trivial environmental niches where random behavior and best-responses to randomness (Level-1) are selected for under moderate to high complexity costs. I conclude that bounded-rational policies exhibit both procedural and ecological rationality once the complexity of decision processes and interactions with environmental characteristics are accounted for.	Leonidas Spiliopoulos
d1_s06_rg	d1_s06_rg	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room G	Games & Behavior	ALEKSEI	CHERNULICH	8ac0c0	New York University Abu Dhabi	A Natural Experiment on the Value of Strategic Unpredictability: Sign Stealing in Baseball	What is the strategic value of being unpredictable? In soccer, what advantage does the kicker gain by being unpredictable in the direction of the kick? In tennis, what edge does the server forgo if the receiver can anticipate the direction of the serve? What advantage does the batter gain if he knows the type of pitch that will be delivered? The degree to which a kicker, server, or pitcher has an incentive to be unpredictable will determine the degree to which players have an incentive to learn to be unpredictable and, more generally, to play a mixed-strategy equilibrium. This paper uses data from major league baseball to estimate the strategic value of being unpredictable, exploiting the fact that the Houston Astros engaged in "sign stealing" in the 2017 season. We find that the strategic value of being unpredictable is economically significant.	Aleksei Chernulich, Romain Gauriot, and John Wooders
d1_s06_rg	d1_s06_rg	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room G	Games & Behavior	ALEIX	GARCIA GALOCHA	4c3636	University of the Basque Country	Do Non-strategic Considerations in Games Matter for Behavior? Experimental Study Informed by Direct-sum Decompositions of Games	Combining Candogan et al. (2011) and Jessie and Saari (2015) direct-sum decompositions, we obtain a four-component decomposition of games, which allows us to separate the strategic component into potential and harmonic, and the non-strategic component into behavioral and kernel components. The predictions of strategic solutions, such as the Nash equilibrium, are invariant to changes in the non-strategic component of a game but other solution concepts depend on the non-strategic component. The main research question we address in the paper is: is individual behavior affected by changes in the non-strategic component? We designed 3x3 normal-form games informed by the four component direct-sum decomposition of games, to empirically test, if and when, these manipulations in the non-strategic component affect individual behavior. We find that the changes in the non-strategic component affect behavior only when they affect efficiency orderings in the original game, such that social welfare maximizing type of behavior would be affected by these changes.<br><br>	Aleix Garcia-Galocha, Elena Iñarra,  Nagore Iriberri
d1_s06_rg	d1_s06_rg	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room G	Games & Behavior	HANNES	RAU	02f820	KIT Karlsruhe	Nash equilibrium play in preference games	The Nash equilibrium is a widely used concept in Economics and in many other (social) sciences. However, in several situations it does not seem to accurately predict behavior. A well-established fact is that players' own material payoffs in a game do not necessarily represent their utilities. If this is the case, the players may actually face a very different kind of strategic situation. This could be an explanation why in several cases low frequencies of equilibrium play are observed. We conduct an experimental study to examine if players more often reach an equilibrium outcome when their social preferences are taken into account for the prediction. In doing so, we first elicit players' preferences over a set of payoff pairs. Afterwards, subjects play a couple of one-shot 2x2 games. The payoff vectors of the outcomes of the games exactly correspond to the pairs subjects ranked beforehand. This allows us to identify the equilibrium structure of what we call the "preference games". In several cases those differ with respect to their strategic properties in comparison to the original "monetary games". We find that basing the prediction on players' preferences leads to significantly higher frequencies of equilibrium play.<br><br>	NA
d1_s06_ri	d1_s06_ri	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences II	PIERLUIGI	CONZO	8e166e	UNIVERSITY OF TURIN & COLLEGIO CARLO ALBERTO	Pandemic crisis, immigration and socio-political preferences: An experimental investigation	During economic hardships, politicians often leverage citizens’ discontent to obtain support for anti-immigration policies. At the onset of the pandemic crisis in Italy, some politicians reported on the extent of migratory flows in a distorted way to create a connection between migrants and the spread of the virus. This paper tests whether political campaigns scapegoating migrants for the health crisis affect social, political, and economic attitudes and behaviors. We implement an online nationally-representative survey experiment, with some money-incentivized tasks, to analyze the effects of information provision about immigration on attitudes and behavior. We manipulate the quantity and the content of information, including facts emphasizing also the potential health consequences of immigration. Results show that information campaigns pessimistically emphasizing immigration and health threats do not generate sizeable add-on effects compared to those based on immigration only. If anything, they marginally increased disappointment towards Italians, reduced social and institutional trust, and undermined partisanship among extreme-right supporters. Overall, such campaigns appear relatively ineffective or, when successful, counterproductive from the social and political viewpoints. 	Michela Boldrini, Roberto Zotti
d1_s06_ri	d1_s06_ri	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences II	DIYA	ABRAHAM	5f59fa	Masaryk University	Opting In to Dictator Games: The effect of voluntary vulnerability on dictator giving.	I investigate whether voluntarily becoming vulnerable when asking for help affects how the helper responds. To test this, I employ a dictator game in which dictators have 3x the initial endowment of recipients. Potential recipients choose whether they want to engage in the game thus &ldquo;asking  for help&rdquo;, or stay out of it, in which case the game ends and both players receive their initial endowments. In different treatments, I vary whether dictators have the option to take money from the recipients if they enter (take vs. give games), and whether recipients themselves make the choice to enter the game or a random lottery outcome determines their entry (opt-in vs. standard games). List (2007) and Bardsley (2008) demonstrated that introducing take options has a negative effect on giving in the standard games. But in the "opt-in" version of the take game, the recipient opting in could be interpreted as a signal that she is willing to become vulnerable to the dictator&rsquo;s actions, and this could potentially have a positive effect on giving (in line with the experimental findings of Cox et al., 2016 and Engler et al., 2018). While dictators' beliefs about recipients' expectations are in line with this line of reasoning, I find no difference in their behavior in the opt-in vs. in the standard take game. I also find that conditional on giving a positive amount, introducing take options has an even stronger negative effect on giving in the opt-in games compared with the standard games. The beliefs elicited from dictators indicate that their behavior runs contrary to theories of both sequential reciprocity and guilt aversion. Overall, my results suggest that in this zero-sum environment, voluntarily becoming vulnerable to someone else's actions is not strong enough to elicit a positive (reciprocal) response from them.	Diya Abraham
d1_s06_ri	d1_s06_ri	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences II	TAHAHOSSEIN	MOVAHEDI	fe099c	University of Portsmouth	Moral Wiggle Room and Identity-based Discrimination 	Altruistic behaviour has been shown to be sensitive to contextual settings such as a possibility of a moral wiggle room. When moral wiggle room for selfishness is available individuals more frequently choose selfish outcomes. Individuals also have a preference to discriminate between an outgroup and an ingroup member of the social group that they belong to. We ask how does the possibility of moral wiggle room interact with group preferences to affect altruistic behaviour? We hypothesize that selfish behaviour will increase when moral wiggle room is possible and there will be more discriminatory exploitation of moral wiggle rooms against outgroups than ingroups. We find that in settings where the use of moral wiggle room is not possible, very few people choose the selfish option and there is no discrimination between an ingroup and outgroup. However, in settings where moral wiggle room is possible, participants choose the selfish option more frequently and clearly show discriminatory behaviour against an outgroup member. We conclude that moral wiggle room is used as an excuse to discriminate in situations where blatant discrimination cannot be morally justified.   Keywords: moral wiggle room, discrimination, social identity, ingroup, outgroup, altruism.    	Taha Movahedi and Zahra Murad
d1_s06_ri	d1_s06_ri	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences II	ROBIN	MUSOLFF	612cfa	Bonn Graduate School of Economics	Absolute and Relative Framing of Trends in Inequality	Trends in economic inequality can be presented both in absolute and relative terms. Using an online experiment, I show that distributional choices about the payoffs of others are affected by the absolute and relative framing of wealth changes. Subjects to whom changes are presented as additional euro amounts choose distributions with significantly more equalized incomes than those to whom changes are framed in terms of percentage growth. Meanwhile, subjects who are shown relatively framed information exhibit a greater tendency to equalize percentage growth. Consequently, income inequality is significantly smaller in the absolute framing condition. Confusion does not seem to be the main driver of the framing effect. Rather, there is suggestive evidence that the two presentations nudge people into applying different concepts of inequality to their choices.	Robin Musolff
d1_s06_ri	d1_s06_ri	1 Sep 2022	16:45 - 18:15	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences II	MARIUS	ALT	feac4a	Joint Research Center, European Commission	Synergies of interventions to tackle climate change	To adequately design and implement environmental policies, it is paramount to understand the underlying drivers of preferences for regulatory instruments. In this study, I experimentally investigate the demand for environmental policies using a pro-environmental real-effort task to analyze the demand for three interventions, comprising a nudge, a monetary incentive, and a punishment. Through exogenous treatment variation along two dimensions, I assess to which degree interventions are demanded in their function as commitment devices for pro-environmental behavior and how demand is rendered if also others are affected by the intervention. The findings show that a large fraction of individuals demand regulation, which is, however, heterogeneously distributed across participants, being dependent on individual characteristics. Moreover, I find that particularly participants who are sophisticated about their time-inconsistent prosocial preferences demand interventions to commit to pro-environmental behavior. Imposing the intervention also on other participants mostly leads to an increase in the demand due to its effect on conditional cooperative individuals who are not averse to constraining others' behavior. Finally, I provide evidence that the experimentally elicited demand for interventions can serve as a predictor of preferences for actual environmental policies.	Marius Alt
d2_s01_ra	d2_s01_ra	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Markets & Industrial Organization	ANNA RITA	BENNATO	cf5659	Loughborough Univeristy	Local Energy for Sale: An Experimental Analysis of Consumers’ Decision-Making in Peer-to-Peer Energy Trading Platforms	As energy markets are becoming more decentralised, energy trading platforms are emerging as a promising tool which can facilitate the integration and coordination of energy consumption, encouraging the use of renewable source of energy. Peer-to-peer energy trading platforms represent a new market place where consumers who can both generate and use their own energy (i.e. prosumers) are able to share part of their energy production with those who can be considered as traditional consumers. By empirical exploring three different European countries, Italy, Spain and the United Kingdom, we study the effectiveness of both economic and non-economic incentives in understanding consumers&rsquo; willingness to pay for electricity in a platform. We collect our data making use of an incentivized online survey experiment. To determine if consumers will use the proposed energy platform to maximise their individual benefits in the form of electricity bill savings or if they will act pro-socially and maximise community benefits, we employ a set of contingent valuation experiments. We also explore how individuals&rsquo; socio-economic characteristics, attitudes and behavioural biases affect their decisions and willingness to pay. In our findings emerges that determinants such as pro-environmental attitudes and wish for independence from the current electricity suppliers influence individuals&rsquo; willingness to pay for electricity in the platform. Results also show that consumers exhibit pro-social behaviour in their pricing decisions, suggesting that the use of peer-to-peer energy trading platforms can be beneficial to all participants.	Shandelle Steadman (Cranfield University), Monica Giulietti (Loughborough University)
d2_s01_ra	d2_s01_ra	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Markets & Industrial Organization	ADRIÀ	BRONCHAL RUEDA	cc3eae	University of Innsbruck	An Experimental Study on Group Identity in Strategic Games	In this paper we study the effects of group identity in oligopoly markets and its effects on cooperation in the laboratory. We design an experiment with a 3x2 between-subjects design in which we vary the artificial group identity: no-group, in-group, and out-group; and the nature of one-shot strategic interaction: games of strategic substitutes or of strategic complements. Our results show that in treatments with strategic complements, group identity only matters in the first few rounds with in-groups delivering more cooperative choices.  However, this effect disappears in later rounds indicating that the experience of competing is stronger than the initially induced identity. However, in treatments with strategic substitutes, we find that choices are significantly less cooperative with out-groups compared to no-groups throughout the game, indicating that this effect is persistent over time.	Anna Bayona, Adrià Bronchal
d2_s01_ra	d2_s01_ra	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Markets & Industrial Organization	JUDITH	SCHWARTZ	64d368	DICE, University of Düsseldorf	Ringleader Discrimination: Theoretical and Experimental Evidence on Leniency Programs	Many countries have introduced leniency programs into their Antitrust law to prohibit illegal cartelization. In our paper, we investigate two common approaches for leniency programs: A non-discriminatory leniency program and ringleader discrimination, where the main instigator (Ringleader) is excluded from leniency. We find those discriminating policies are less effective to incentivize whistle-blowing but at the same time more effective in prohibiting the formation of cartels. Furthermore, we show that whether one or the other policy is more effective depends on the market concentration but can be adjusted for other market factors. We test our theoretical results in a laboratory experiment. We expect non-discriminatory leniency programs to be more efficient in small markets (three firms), while ringleader discrimination policies are more effective in large markets (four firms).	Jonathan Meinhof, Judith Schwartz
d2_s01_ra	d2_s01_ra	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Markets & Industrial Organization	ALISA	FREY	ae558d	Duesseldorf Institute for Competition Economics, DICE	Entry Barriers and Transparency in Markets for Experience Goods: Experimental Evidence	Motivated by recent regulatory efforts to improve market outcomes in markets for experience goods (for example, master craftsman&rsquo;s diploma), we perform an experiment to study the effect of a market entry barrier in the form of necessary qualification in a market for experience goods. We test two different scenarios to address differences in information provision through qualification: Qualification can either signal the exact quality of a product/service, or it can signal that a firm is, in principle, capable to provide a high quality. The market is served by two firms that first choose whether they want to invest in qualification; thereafter, they choose a quality and a price for the product offered. In both scenarios, we perform one treatment in which both firms can always offer a product irrespective of their investment decision and a second treatment in which investment in qualification is necessary to offer a product (entry barrier). In line with theoretical predictions, firms invest significantly more in both scenarios when the investment in qualification is a necessary obligation to participate in the market. In both treatments in which buyers never observe quality, however, we find more investments than predicted. At the same time, we do not &mdash;  as predicted &mdash; see a substantial change in quality across treatments in this scenario. In contrast to our theoretical predictions, we observe a significantly higher quality in the second scenario in which, after investment in qualification, buyers can observe a product&rsquo;s quality prior to a transaction. In this scenario, consumer surplus also increases. Our findings suggest that a market entry barrier imposed by investment in qualification might lead to higher quality and higher consumer surplus if the qualification leads to more transparency with regard to the quality offered. By contrast, if product quality remains unknown to consumers, an entry barrier in the form of qualification investment results in lower consumer surplus.	Alisa Frey, Nicolas Fugger, Alexander Rasch
d2_s01_ra	d2_s01_ra	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room A	Markets & Industrial Organization	FREDERIC	SCHNEIDER	4efddf	University of Cambridge	Common ownership, governance, and firm behavior: experimental evidence	A recent literature on the effects of common ownership of product market rivals on market outcomes has triggered far-reaching policy proposals to reform the basic workings of the asset management industry. However, given limitations of theory and measurement challenges, questions remain about the extent to which the existing results should be interpreted as causal effects, which corporate mechanisms are at play, and which policy interventions are likely to be effective.  We study these questions in a controlled laboratory environment, in which the experimenter can vary ownership and thus infer causal effects with greater confidence. Despite the inherent limitations of experiments, policymakers may wish to consult these results to assess the likely effectiveness and possible side effects of planned large-scale interventions. In our experiment, there are two firms, managed by two managers and owned by two shareholders. Managers choose production quantities. The price in the market depends on the total production of both firms. Subjects play the experiment for multiple rounds. Shareholders initially own 100\% of one of the firms each (divided ownership). During the experiment, they have the option to exchange half of their shares so that they each own 50\% of both firms. The shareholders' incentives change with the ownership. If they each own shares in only one firm, they are best off when their manager produces the Cournot duopoly quantity. If they each own shares in both firms, they are best off when their manager produces half of the monopoly quantity. Overall shareholder profits are higher if both managers produce half of the monopoly quantity than if both produce the Cournot duopoly quantity.  Shareholders also have the opportunity to incentivise managers. The incentive options differ between the two treatments we run. In treatment 1, shareholders can choose incentive contracts before the managers make their decision. Shareholders have the option to choose flat incentives, which should have no impact on manager behaviour Moreover, they can commit to paying managers a bonus, if the profit they make is at least as high as that of the competing firm (relative profit incentives). This incentivizes managers to compete aggressively, Finally, they can commit to paying managers a bonus if their firm's margin is at least as high as that of the competing firm, which incentivizes managers to compete less aggressively. In treatment 2, shareholders can voluntarily pay a bonus after observing the manager's choice, which gives them the option to reward desirable behaviour by the managers which should induce those to keep showing this behaviour. Subjects play the experiment for 15 rounds.  A significant share of managers, albeit less than half, produces the Cournot duopoly quantity (26) and hence behaves anti-competitively. Moreover, around 40 % of the shareholders vote to exchange shares.  In our first analysis, we study if managers respond to incentives set by the shareholders. A regression shows that relative profit incentives do not affect the managers' decisions. This could be explained by the fact that managers have a  preference for producing the Cournot duopoly quantity in the absence of incentives so that further incentives to do so have no effect. Relative margin incentives on the other hand make it significantly more likely that the manager produces half of the monopoly quantity. A larger bonus makes it significantly less likely that the manager changes their production.  Next, we study if managers set the correct incentives given their diversification status. We find a negative link between the incentive dummy and the diversification dummy, which indicates that shareholders set more anticompetitive incentives if they are diversified. We also find a strong positive link between the bonus and the interaction term, which indicates that shareholders pay a larger bonus if the manager produced half of the monopoly quantity when the shareholder was diversified.  Finally, we study if shareholders choose to diversify in order to be able to set anticompetitive incentives and profit from reduced competition. A regression analysis shows that shareholders who voted to diversify in the last round are more likely to do so again, suggesting a somewhat stable preference for diversification. However, if an ownership exchange actually happened (i.e. if both shareholders agreed to an ownership exchange in a given round) this makes shareholders less likely to vote to exchange ownership again. Hence, we do not see that shareholders learn about the advantages of diversification, once they have experienced it. This suggests that the markets will not converge towards diversification in the long run. Our study also includes a comprehension check, which subjects can pass either on their first attempt. We use this information as a proxy for how well subjects understand the experiment and we do not find that subjects with a better understanding of the experiment are significantly more likely to diversify.  In summary, we find that managers respond to incentives and that shareholders correctly use incentives to influence managers to produce the quantity that is in their best interest given their diversification status. However, we do not find that shareholders anticipate this and chose to strategically diversify. Our markets do not converge towards diversification. In future research, we plan to study if this is driven by the default, which was no diversification in both treatments, by running sessions in which shareholders start out diversified and can choose to become concentrated owners.	Jonas Frey, Axel Ockenfels, Martin Schmalz, Frederic Schneider
d2_s01_rb	d2_s01_rb	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Social & Group Behavior	FLORIAN	HETT	0a3f0a	Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz	Social identity and ingroup bias in belief formation	A large literature in social psychology and experimental economics has documented a broad variety of behavioral reactions to group membership, most famously ingroup-bias in allocation decisions. In our study, we investigate whether this phenomenon also extends to the domain of belief formation and updating. Building on a novel experimental paradigm, we show that individuals indeed display ingroup bias in the demand for as well as in the processing of information, even if the information itself is entirely objective as well as unrelated to the nature of groups and memberships therein. We also show that individual heterogeneity of ingroup bias in belief formation is systematically correlated with ingroup bias in allocation decisions. Taken together our results indicate that the sensitivity to group settings might constitute a universal and domain-independent trait, which is measurable on the individual level using behavioral experiments.	Kevin Bauer, Yan Chen, Florian Hett, Michael Kosfeld
d2_s01_rb	d2_s01_rb	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Social & Group Behavior	YULIET	VERBEL	11cadd	University of Nottingham	Better Together: Shared Responsibility and Corruption	Previous research on corruption has focused separately on bribery and embezzlement scenarios, and there is a question that remains unanswered: are people more willing to bribe or to embezzle? Situations of bribery and embezzlement differ in the number of decision makers involved and, with this, in the level of responsibility that each one entails. We study the willingness to engage in these two types of corruption through the implementation of outcome equivalent games that only differ in the level of responsibility that the decision maker entails. We find that the willingness to engage in corruption is higher in scenarios of bribery than in scenarios of embezzlement, implying that sharing the responsibility for the outcome leads to more corruption.	Yuliet Verbel
d2_s01_rb	d2_s01_rb	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Social & Group Behavior	CEREN BENGU	CIBIK	554a43	University of Warwick	Ignoring Good Advice	People are not experts in every domain. As such, individuals go through life adopting the advice of others in order to make better decisions in all manner of areas e.g., medical, legal, educational, social, political, financial, etc. However, it seems as though the advice of experts is often ignored, as some recent examples across the globe highlight. Both the debate in the UK surrounding Brexit and the 2016 US presidential election indicated an increasing distrust of expert opinion among voters. One of the UK's most respected scientists, Stephen Hawking, described Brexit, which was opposed by many professional groups including doctors, scientists, and economists (1), as &ldquo;the moment when the forgotten spoke, finding their voices to reject the advice and guidance of experts and the elite everywhere."(2) In the run-up to the 2016 presidential election, groups of prominent experts in various fields, e.g., scientists and economists, (3) spoke up against the potential election of Donald Trump; advice insufficient to prevent him winning the election.  There are many reasons why advice may be ignored. For example, there is nearly always uncertainty over whether advice from a given source is good. We define advice from one individual (an &ldquo;adviser&rdquo;) to another (an &ldquo;advisee&rdquo;) as &ldquo;good&rdquo; if accepting the advice increases the expected material payoff of the advisee, or &ldquo;bad&rdquo; if it reduces it. In reality, if advice is perceived as bad e.g., coming from a biased or corrupt source, it can be rational to ignore it (see e.g., Cain, Loewenstein, and Moore, 2005). In contrast, if good advice is ignored, it is a concern for society at large as well as for experts themselves, including economists. In this paper, we study whether, when and why individuals may irrationally ignore good advice. To address these questions, we ran a pre-registered online experiment in which individuals completed an incentivized task (either the luck task or the effort task) that decided their bonus payment. (4) They were then presented with advice from the adviser who recommends submitting his own responses instead of the participants&rsquo; ones to determine the participants&rsquo; bonus payment. Therefore, the advice offered to a participant was good (bad) when the adviser did better (worse) in the task than the participant, in other words, when the adviser won a higher (lower) bonus payment than the participant. Good advice was ignored: about 25% of the time, advisees chose to submit their own score instead of higher-scoring advisers, reducing their payoff. When the adviser performed better than the participants in the effort task (rather than the luck task), good advice was ignored less often. We explain the data focused on one main behavioral force: the sunk cost fallacy. Susceptibility to the sunk cost fallacy harmed the uptake of good advice. This is consistent with the idea that subjects feel resistant to changing their answers when they put in the effort to formulate them. 	Ceren Bengu Cibik, David Ronayne, Daniel Sgroi
d2_s01_rb	d2_s01_rb	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Social & Group Behavior	HEDDA	NIELSEN	ad0f6f	Berlin School of Economics/Humboldt University of Berlin	Merit in a Society of Unequal Opportunity	Equality of opportunity, a central part of the meritocratic ideal, is rarely attained in reality. Unequal opportunities present a dilemma for meritocrats who seek to reward effort and compensate for luck, as opportunities are a form of luck which affects effort. Using a worker-spectator experiment with a large-scale representative sample (>8 000 subjects) from the U.S. and Scandinavia, we study how individuals redistribute income under unequal opportunities. Preliminary results show a substantial increase in inequality acceptance when unequal opportunities generated differences in incomes compared to when luck, which does not impact behavior, generated the same income differences. Greater inequality acceptance under unequal opportunities appears driven by two distinct forces: mistakenly attributing the impact of unequal circumstances to workers' ability or viewing effort, even if a result of opportunities, as morally relevant.	Alexander W. Cappelen, Yiming Liu, Hedda Nielsen, Bertil Tungodden
d2_s01_rb	d2_s01_rb	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room B	Social & Group Behavior	ANDREA	ISONI	2aa984	University of Warwick	The effect of relative performance feedback on effort and free riding in creative and repetitive team tasks	We conduct an experiment to study the effect of performance feedback incentives in creative and repetitive team tasks in which individuals benefit from free riding. Participants take part in a two-person real effort task repeated for eight three-minute periods. In every period, time can be allocated between team and individual production. Effort is rewarded with a piece rate for the total produced by the team, and a higher piece rate for the units produced individually. We compare team effort and performance in a 2 (creative vs. repetitive) by 2 (whether or not relative team performance information is provided) design. We find that less time is contributed to the team production in the intrinsically-rewarding creative task than in the repetitive task. Providing relative team performance feedback increases time contributions and team output in the creative task but has no effect on the repetitive task.	Andrea Isoni, Dawn Eubanks
d2_s01_rc	d2_s01_rc	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Social Behavior & Communication	LINGQING	JIANG	eed51d	University of Essex	Information Exchange and Multiple Peer Groups:   A Natural Experiment  in an  Online Community	We utilise a  quasi-experimental setup to  identify  causal effects of having additional peer groups on information exchange in a large online maternity community. The information exchange is a key performance indicator for the community as well as a public good among users. Pregnant users join default peer groups based on estimated due date (EDD). Natural uncertainties of EDD can lead to multiple peer groups.  Using EDD as an instrumental variable, we find that additional peer group(s) reduces information exchange in both default peer group and total peer groups. Having more advanced groups mitigates the reduction, likely due to information spillovers.	Lingqing Jiang and Zhen Zhu
d2_s01_rc	d2_s01_rc	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Social Behavior & Communication	MICHAEL	THALER	d57bad	UNIVERSITY COLLEGE LONDON	The Supply of Motivated Beliefs	When people choose what messages to send to others, they often consider how others will interpret the messages. In many environments, particularly in politics, people are motivated to hold particular beliefs and distort how they process information in directions that favor their motivated beliefs. This paper uses two experiments to study how message senders are affected by receivers' motivated beliefs. Experiment 1, conducted using an online sample of social media users, analyzes the effect of incentivizing senders to be perceived as truthful. These incentives cause senders to send less truthful messages. When incentivized, senders send more false information when it aligns with receivers' politically-motivated beliefs, controlling for receivers' current beliefs. However, receivers do not anticipate the adverse effects of senders' incentives. Experiment 2 further isolates the role that information processing plays by analyzing an environment in which receivers assess the truthfulness of messages from a computer and senders choose one of the computer's messages to determine their earnings. Senders predict that receivers distort information processing in the direction of their politics, demand information about receivers' political preferences, and condition on the receivers' politics to strategically choose less truthful computer messages.	Michael Thaler
d2_s01_rc	d2_s01_rc	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Social Behavior & Communication	KATHARINA	WERNER	06fe17	University of Passau	CANCELED: Can intergroup contact increase cooperation after a violent conflict?  Testing different types of contact in a lab-in-the-field experiment	Many studies on violent conflict examine the consequences of conflict exposure. Yet, there is little evidence on what kind of peacebuilding interventions are efficient. Allport's famous contact hypothesis promotes contact between groups to overcome prejudice and discrimination. Such contact seems to work in peaceful environments. But also in environments of conflict, encounter programs are commonly used and employ various types of contact. Given the wide usage, there is surprisingly little empirical evidence which proves the efficacy of out-group contact in environments of inter-group conflict or shows what type of contact works under which conditions. We run Multilevel Public Goods Games and Trust Games with 1500 participants in Indonesia - in a region with a history of sectarian conflict and one without conflict. In three treatments, we exogenously induce contact between groups of three Muslims and three Christians to test different types of contact: Free communication without given topic, talking about the conflict and related emotions, or working on a joint task. Our findings indicate that free communication is the safest and most promising form of contact. Text analysis explains the impact of our interventions on mediating attitudes and our behavioral measures. Free communication and talking about the history of conflict generally involve more sentiment and emotions than working on a joint task, in which communication is more neutral. In the free communication treatment communication is more positive, whereas positive sentiments are as common as negative sentiments in the history of conflict treatment. While free communication works anywhere, the impact of talking about the history of conflict on attitudes and behavior differs between the region with and without conflict.	Swee Hoon Chuah
d2_s01_rc	d2_s01_rc	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Social Behavior & Communication	SIMONA	GRASSI	081189	King's College London	Strategic Competition and Self-Confidence	This study tests the hypothesis that competitive strategic interactions foster overconfidence. We experimentally compare strategic environments in which players have an incentive to overstate their own ability to deter competitors and avoid competition with a non-strategic environment in which these incentives are removed. Subsequently, we measure the participants' confidence. Overconfidence persists in the former environments but vanishes in the latter. We provide evidence for three behavioral mechanisms that contribute to the persistence of overconfidence. First, participants who win uncontested update their confidence as if they had won in an actual competition.  Second, by contrast, participants who do not compete do not update their confidence, thus creating an asymmetry in updating. Third, inflated ability messages are ``contagious'' because they affect how their receivers update their confidence. We provide empirical evidence on the role of these mechanisms to explain the Dunning--Kruger effect and gender differences in confidence.	Stefanie Brilon, Simona Grassi, Manuel Grieder, Jonathan Schulz
d2_s01_rc	d2_s01_rc	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room C	Social Behavior & Communication	TILL	WEBER	faa8d2	Newcastle University	Cooperation, inequality and the strength of social ties: Evidence from randomly assigned real groups	Many economic and social activities involve cooperation problems. In the wild, these occur as interactions between people with a varying strength of social ties: for example, between family members, colleagues, acquaintances or strangers. In two studies, we investigate the dynamics of social ties in randomly assigned real groups, as well as their effect on cooperative preferences, beliefs and behaviour. In a first study, we recruited soldiers (N=235) participating in a Swiss army training programme that lasted for four weeks and included random allocation to units. We measured the perceived closeness to "close" persons (members of their unit) and "distant" persons (members of other units). The perceived strength of social ties increased continuously over the course of the training for close persons but remained low for distant persons. Within a given unit, relationship closeness increased over the course of the training for relatively close and distant ties showing no evidence of a break in group cohesion. In a second study, we recruited soldiers (N=308) in further iterations of the training programme to participate in a lab-in-the-field experiment. They were matched with either a "close" person who was a member of their unit or a "distant" person stranger to them. Participants in closer social ties displayed less sensitivity to inequality, were more likely to expect cooperation and more likely to cooperate themselves. A mediation analysis revealed that a substantial share of the effect of the strength of social ties is mediated through beliefs. Therefore, closer social ties might contribute additional social information that makes us more inclined to view others as cooperative and cooperate ourselves. Our results relate to the literature on preference stability, suggesting that distributive preferences might vary with strength of social ties, but only for disadvantageous inequality in payoffs. The participants' sensitivity to advantageous inequality appears stable over different levels of strength of social ties. Additionally, our results suggest that cooperative beliefs are an important factor in explaining behaviour, as they capture a large proportion of the effect of strength of social ties.	Simon Gaechter, Chris Starmer, Christian Thoeni, Fabio Tufano and Till Weber
d2_s01_rd	d2_s01_rd	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Risk II	ANDREAS	DRICHOUTIS	c715cb	Agricultural University of Athens	Visual formats in risk preference elicitation: What caught one's eye	We explore the effect of different presentation formats on elicitation of risk preferences using a popular probability-varying task (Holt and Laury, 2002) and a monetary-varying task (Drichoutis and Lusk, 2016). The presentation formats use horizontal bars that vary either the width or height of the bars (or both at the same time) to potentially help subjects in judging how large or small probabilities and monetary amounts are in a given choice task. These graphical formats are compared to a text only format. We complement our data collection with eye-tracking data that allows us to enrich our structural models with additional information regarding visual attention and engagement towards the presented information. Our preliminary analysis finds no statistically significant effects of presentation formats on elicited parameters for risk preferences while we find that eye tracking data are associated with differences in elicited parameters.	Michelle Segovia, Marco A. Palma, Jayson L. Lusk, Andreas C. Drichoutis
d2_s01_rd	d2_s01_rd	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Risk II	SUVARNA	PANDE	a3375d	University of East Anglia	Split In Probability Weights - Scarcity, Cognitive Load And Tunnelling	Better poverty alleviation policies necessitate a better understanding of the decision-making processes. The bulk of literature on poverty and poverty traps focuses on information- institutional failures of some kind to explain outcomes&mdash;case studies on insurance and agricultural fertiliser in the developing world point to the indispensability of psychological mechanisms. At first glance, low pickup rates of preventative health, medications or high-interest borrowing behaviours of the poor seem actively self&ndash;sabotaging.   Broadly, poverty has focussed on systemic factors, individual factors, environmental pressures, or a combination of the three. Anti-poverty policies in the UK and the USA blamed the poor's poor values, characteristics, or inability to understand education and health benefits. The analysis would trace the outcomes to political and economic systems on the other side. However, another side of the story remains relatively less understood &ndash; the causal effects of poverty that change the decision-making process itself. A rapidly emerging debate between policymakers brings forth this fourth perspective. Within this framework, the shortfall of resources or deprivation changes cognitive systems that ultimately affect decisions.   Scarcity or the feeling of having less than you need alters the decision-making process. This poverty triggered mechanism makes economic decisions more difficult by curtailing cognitive control. This involuntary load redirects the slower, deliberative part of the cognitive system (System 2) towards making the most rational choices for scarcity alleviation. At the same time, other preferences get overwhelmingly guided by the faster, affective system&mdash;such recalibration results in the rational-bias split or tunnelling in preferences. Pressed for resources, people tend to become judicious for relevant commitments as other beneficial, but irrelevant choices suffer. This sensitivity to 'what matters' changes preferences. Our work is an inquiry into this dichotomy of risk preferences.  We investigate the effect of scarcity on the probability weighting function through the cognitive load channel. Using a (2*2*2) 600 people between-within lab-in-field design in Bwikhonge Uganda, we use the natural harvest cycle of the region added with priming as scarcity treatment at a between-subject level. This is followed by a cognitive load test for understanding the role of attention and inhibitory control in guiding the mechanism. Finally, we introduce within-subject scarcity relevant-irrelevant common consequence ladders to approximate the hypothesised effect on the probability weighting function. We find more expected utility consistent decisions for choices that resolve the scarcity at hand. The probability weighting function is a straight line. On the other hand, irrelevant choices are increasingly biased with greater scarcity; the function is more curved for the same person.  With this understanding of the mechanics of bifurcation in preferences, it is possible to increase the efficiency of future policies in a cost-effective manner. The work may contribute to improved policy, mitigation against scarcity traps, and known behavioural effects of poverty by designing better defaults, assistance (to reduce scarcity led cognitive load at source), reducing uncertainties (changing nature of scarcity), or information prompts (understanding the involuntary dynamic tunnelling-split involved).	SUVARNA PANDE
d2_s01_rd	d2_s01_rd	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Risk II	WOLFGANG	LUHAN	336285	University of Portsmouth	The Needs of the Many, the Wealth of the Few:  How Responsibility Affects Risky Decision-Making for Others	Money managers&rsquo; excessive risk-taking for their clients has long been identified as one of the driving factors behind bubbles in asset markets (e.g., Allen &amp; Gorton, 1993; Fabretti et al., 2017; Holmen et al., 2014; Kleinlercher et al., 2014). A recent line of literature points to evoking a sense of responsibility as a way to promote greater risk-aversion (Bolton, Ockenfels, &amp; Stauf, 2015; Charness, 2000; Charness &amp; Jackson, 2009; F&uuml;llbrunn &amp; Luhan, 2020). However, what is missing is a full analysis of the driving factors behind this responsibility alleviation effect in risky decisions. We analyse two common factors that may amplify perceived responsibility in risky decision-making for others &ndash; the number of affected clients and the investment amount. We systematically vary the number of clients, the investment amounts and the overall investment sum in an online experiment. This allows us to address a gap in the existing literature; namely, when investing for a larger number of recipients, is it the number of people impacted or the amount of money that affects the decision? Overall, we replicate a responsibility alleviation effect across treatments but find no evidence that agents become more risk-averse when investing for more recipients. We do see a significant effect of the increased endowment amounts per recipient which can be explained by increased relative risk aversion, but we find no significant effect of the total endowment of the group. Agents clearly try to invest as they think their recipient(s) would invest for themselves, but the investments were also substantially influenced by the agent&rsquo;s own risk preferences.	Wolfgang J.  Luhan, Georgia E. Buckle
d2_s01_rd	d2_s01_rd	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room D	Decision Theory & Risk II	PATRIZIA	SBRIGLIA	a037a2	department of economics university of Campania-Luigi Vanvitelli	Organised Crime Makes You Lie Hastily. Evidence from an on-line experiment	We investigate experimentally whether exposure to a context plagued by organised crime violence induces people to misreport private information as an instinctive re- sponse. We implement a standard coin ipping task repeated for 30 times, and measure participants' response times to identify hasty and thoughtful types of subjects. Our findings support the hypothesis that living in a context plagued by organised crime violence induces a prevalence of hasty subjects who lie as an instinctive response. We record a higher degree of randomness in the decisions of hasty subjects compared to the thoughtful ones, indicating that exposure to a criminal context might limit individuals' ability to correctly figure out the incentives of the decision problem at hand.	A.Conte, P. Sbriglia, M. Stimolo
d2_s01_re	d2_s01_re	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Field Experiments: Social Behavior & Identity	MARIA	MARINO	f900d7	UAB (UNIVERSITAT AUTONOMA DE BARCELONA)	Uncovering in-group bias in preferences for redistribution: a survey experiment in Italy	Given the growing evidence that people misperceive inequality, a strand of the literature has started to question the assumption of the median voter theory that individuals have perfect information on inequality. For such reason, in the last decade, many survey experiments with provision of information on the true level of inequality have been implemented. Nevertheless, such studies find that, once provided accurate information, individuals only slightly change their preferences for redistribution when informed. Several alternatives have been investigated to explain the above inconclusive findings. Some scholars have focused on the hypothesis that preferences for redistribution are not only affected by (perceptions of) inequality but also by (perceptions of) other facts like immigration. Two mechanisms have been investigated.  We will refer to them as economic and cultural in-group bias. The first &ndash; also known as the competition hypothesis &ndash; states that since immigration is likely to redirect redistribution from poor natives to (more likely to be) poor immigrants, natives are less likely to support redistribution. The second &ndash; also known as anti-solidarity or taste effect - claims that natives are less willing to share public goods with people coming from a culturally distant group. Following the above arguments, we run a survey experiment in Italy where information on inequality is interacted with information on immigration. We use four informational treatments (N=3500). In the first, we provide only information on inequality. In the second treatment, we provide the same information of treatment 1 but also information on the native-immigrants composition of poverty. In treatment 3, information on inequality as in treatment 1 is interacted with information on the cultural diversity of immigrants; finally, the last treatment includes the three-above information. We elicit redistributive preferences &ndash; distinguishing between universal and exclusionary -  tax preferences, preferences for public budget over different policies, support for poor benefits.  Our results show that people misperceive inequality, poverty, and diversity to a great extent. We show also that misperceptions are more polarized on certain issues and across certain groups. We also find that preferences for redistribution are quite inelastic to information on average. Nevertheless, we find that information on the incidence of poverty among Italians and immigrants (where the latter is more pronounced than the former) reduces exclusionary preferences. More precisely, we find that people react to information by reducing their support for a welfare state whose access is restricted to Italians. Our experiment thus reveals an opposing mechanism to the competition hypothesis. Finally, we find some evidence of cultural in group bias by investigating the presence of heterogenous treatment effects across groups differing for their political beliefs and income. 	Riccardo Bruni, Alessandro Gioffre, Maria Marino
d2_s01_re	d2_s01_re	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Field Experiments: Social Behavior & Identity	LIDINGRONG (LI)	HUANG	c88513	NYU Shanghai	Faces matter? Peer information and trust in the field	Trust is central to our everyday lives and there is a growing economics literature on how trust can be enhanced. Little is known, however, about whether the act of revealing one's face would motivate viewers to perceive the information they provide to be more trustworthy and subsequently influence the viewers' economic decision-making in the field.  In this paper, we explore how the potential buyers' trust for peer-generated information such as product reviews can be enhanced by revealing the faces of the review posters who are recent buyers themselves. We first find a pre-existing field setting where such intervention could be carried out and the trustworthiness could be reasonably measured by the revealed behaviour of the subjects after being exposed to the treatment. Our industry partner, an e-commerce firm, presents such an ideal host on which the field experiment could be conducted. In this setting, the peer information is the online product reviews posted by past buyers within the products' description page where purchase decisions are made. Since each review is accompanied on the left-hand side by a profile photo icon, we could modify what this profile photo icon displays, whether it is the customised face picture of the original review poster (i.e. the Face treatment) or the system-default photo of the company mascot (i.e. the Control). Upon entering the online product description page, the potential customers are either shown the face-treated reviews or the control page. Their purchase decisions are then logged which serves as our key dependent variable.  This large-scale field experiment on over 45,000 online buyers finds that the face-treated subjects are more likely to place an order on the experimental products and this effect is statistically significant, albeit economically more modest. On average, over 10% more subjects in the face-treated group decide to subsequently purchase the product. The regression results are robust to additional sample restrictions that limit ourselves to frequent buyers or long-term users, suggesting that the trust-enhancing effect of showing faces persists even among the users who have established long-term relationships or trust with the platform. The findings seem to suggest that revealing faces would indeed improve the trust in the peer information provided. The main experiment is also complemented by an extension that tests whether the personalisation aspect of using a human face as the profile photo would already influence the trustworthiness. Our research contributes to several strands of literature on the economics and psychology of trust and sheds some more light on how human faces modulate trust and trustworthiness in the field.	Lidingrong Huang and Ye Jin
d2_s01_re	d2_s01_re	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Field Experiments: Social Behavior & Identity	MICHAEL	KURSCHILGEN	d1e3c8	UNIDISTANCE SUISSE	Identity and Economic Incentives: Evidence from two large-scale ﬁeld experiments with soccer fans	In many situations, an individual&rsquo;s sense of identity conflicts with economic incentives: if employees identify with their firm, do they invest sufficiently in competing firms to hedge their risk? How do environmentalists feel about investing their savings into oil and gas? Identity can affect such decisions through multiple channels: it can directly cause a psychological cost to invest into assets that violate one&rsquo;s sense of identity. However, identity could also affect beliefs about the payoffs. We present a simple model that allows us to distinguish between these two channels. We apply the model in the context of Premier League clubs: in two large-scale field experiments, we present subjects with the option to invest into a range of bets that involve their supported team winning, losing, or drawing. We also present them with bets that do not involve any team they support. We measure their beliefs over outcomes and measure their investments. This allows us to estimate their risk aversion and identify the impact of identity on beliefs and the psychological costs from betting against one&rsquo;s identity.	Eugen  Dimant, Kwabena Donkor, Lorenz Goette, Michael  Kurschilgen,  Maximilian Mueller
d2_s01_re	d2_s01_re	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Field Experiments: Social Behavior & Identity	ROBERTO	ROZZI	c035fd	Ca' Foscari University	Face Masks and Social Pressure	In this experiment, we estimate the shape of the function mapping the share of people doing an activity to the actual share of the population doing that activity. We study the shape of this function in a particular setting, namely, face masks. Subjects entered a room (one at a time) thinking that they were there solely to answer a decision problem involving lotteries. Unbeknownst to them, the number of the four experimenters in the room wearing a face mask had been randomized (leading to treatments in which 0/4, 1/4, 2/4, 3/4, or 4/4 experimenters were wearing a mask). We then observed whether each subject themselves chose to wear a face mask. We obtain four main results. First, we observe that many individuals defy social pressure. Second, according to our point estimates, the function is strictly increasing (meaning, mask-wearing is driven by social pressure). Third, according to our point estimates, the largest jump in mask wearing arises between the 3/4 and 4/4 treatments. Fourth, the estimated function has an interior fixed point, which we can bound between 20% and 24%.	Itzhak Rasooly, Roberto Rozzi
d2_s01_re	d2_s01_re	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room E	Field Experiments: Social Behavior & Identity	CLAUDIA	ZOLLER	55f9da	Management Center Innsbruck	The roots of cooperation	We study the development of cooperation in 929 young children, aged 3 to 6. In a unified experimental framework, we examine pre-registered hypotheses about which of three fundamental pillars of human cooperation &ndash; direct and indirect reciprocity, and third-party punishment &ndash; emerges earliest as a means to increase cooperation in a repeated prisoner&rsquo;s dilemma game. We find that third-party punishment doubles cooperation rates in comparison to a control condition. Children also reciprocate others&rsquo; behavior, yet direct and indirect reciprocity do not increase overall cooperation rates. We also examine the influence of children&rsquo;s cognitive skills and parents&rsquo; socioeconomic background on cooperation.	Zvonimir Bašić, Parampreet C. Bindra, Daniela Glätzle-Rützler, Angelo Romano, Matthias Sutter, Claudia Zoller
d2_s01_rf	d2_s01_rf	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Lying and Cheating II	SORRAVICH	KINGSUWANKUL	1a8a7b	GATE LSE, University of Lyon	Individual Oath-Swearing and Lying in Group	Previous studies have shown that an honesty oath reduces lying at the individual level and groups lie more than individuals. Does oath reduce lying in group? Results from a lab experiment reveal that the impact of oath extends to a group setting depending on the incentive structure. Oath reduces lying only when group members do not face payoff commonality. Evidence support the notion that the payoff commonality rule creates social pressure on individuals to conform to the group, crowding out the impact of oath. This results in a larger impact of oath under no payoff commonality. The findings provide implications that an oath intervention can interact with the incentive structures in the organization and may have its limits to root out dishonesty in the group setting.	Sorravich Kingsuwankul
d2_s01_rf	d2_s01_rf	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Lying and Cheating II	SUSANNA	GRUNDMANN	829d79	University of Cologne	Heterogeneity in Individual Preferences for Truth-Telling	Fraudulent behavior is prevalent in many markets, particularly, when behavior at the individual level is not observable. Results from aggregate analyses of experimental reporting tasks suggest that preferences for truth-telling are hetereogeneous and determined by the combination of an intrinsic motivation to be honest and the desire to be seen as honest. However, such aggregate data do not allow us to understand which truth-telling types (co-)exist and how prevalent each type is. We propose a novel reporting paradigm to measure preferences for truth-telling that keeps reports unobservable but still identifies both motives independently at the individual level. The key idea of the measure is to rely on decision makers&rsquo; intention to i) be honest and ii) be seen as honest, instead of relying on their actual reports. Results from a student and a general population sample reveal systematic heterogeneity in preference types. Using different validation procedures we find that intention-based measures may allow for the identification of underlying preferences without monitoring reports directly.	Susanna Grundmann, Simeon Schudy, Lisa Spantig
d2_s01_rf	d2_s01_rf	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Lying and Cheating II	ANDREA	MARTINANGELI	d14040	Burgundy School of Business	Cheating responses to tax evasion	We explore cheating rates after a die roll in response to information about tax malpractice in Italy using a survey experiment on a representative sample of the Italian population. We thus generalise laboratory findings on conditional behaviours (cooperation, cheating) to uncover their real-world bearing in the context of tax compliance. Cheating is strongly conditioned on information about tax malpractice, as is the perceived tax compliance norm. We uncover asymmetries along the income gradient: Conditional cheating responses are driven by information about tax malpractice on behalf of top income earners, while perceived tax compliance norms are driven by information about tax malpractice among low income earners.	Andrea Martinangeli, Lisa Windsteiger
d2_s01_rf	d2_s01_rf	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Lying and Cheating II	LILIA	ZHURAKHOVSKA	f3713e	University of Duisburg-Essen	Selection into Leadership and Dishonest Behavior of Leaders: A Gender Experiment	Leaders often have to weigh ethical against monetary consequences. We experimentally analyze such a dilemma. We measure individual honesty preferences in a payoff reporting game. Subsequently, subjects can apply for leadership and report payoffs for a group. In a control, we assign leadership randomly. Women behave less dishonestly than men when reporting for themselves. They increase dishonesty when deciding as leaders. In the control, female leaders do not increase dishonesty. We find that honesty preferences do not explain women&rsquo;s selection into leadership. A follow-up reveals that women who select into leadership become dishonest when believing that group members prefer dishonesty.	Kerstin Grosch, Stephan Mueller, Holger A. Rau, and Lilia Zhurakhovska
d2_s01_rf	d2_s01_rf	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room F	Lying and Cheating II	AGNE	KAJACKAITE	2040a9	UNIVERSITY OF MILAN	Breaking bad:  Malfunctioning institutions erode good behavior	This paper studies whether malfunctioning institutions erode good behavior. We use a large-scale online experiment, in which participants play a repeated observed cheating game. When we ask participants to report honestly and promise no control, we find low cheating rates. When control of truthful reporting is introduced, low cheating rates remain. In our main treatment with a malfunctioning institution, participants do not know whether they are in the treatment with or without control. In this treatment, participants who do not face control for some rounds start cheating significantly more often, reaching highest cheating rates. That is, a malfunctioning institution leads to more cheating than no institution at all, which indicates that the development of cheating behavior is endogenous to the institutions. Our findings suggest a novel negative effect of unenforced laws.	Rustamdjan Hakimov and Agne Kajackaite
d2_s01_rg	d2_s01_rg	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Decision Theory & Bounded Rationality	ALEXANDER	KOCH	ef6025	Aarhus University	Nudging in complex environments	We study the effects of reminder nudges using a novel experimental approach based on a computer game. The game exposes subjects to a complex environment in which they have to pay attention to and perform multiple, different kinds of actions within a short period of time. The set-up allows us to test the effect of reminders not only on the reminded, but also on non-reminded actions and thus to observe whether nudges have (positive or negative) spillovers. Further, it allows to test the effects of multiple vs. single reminders. We test the effects both in the short and long run, i.e., after the withdrawal of the reminder. We observe that both single and multiple nudges have positive effects in the short run -- multiple reminders more so than single reminders: while they lead to crowding-out of non-reminded actions, the positive effect on reminded action dominates. Yet, after withdrawal of the reminders, the negative spillover effect prevails, while the positive effect becomes very small so that, overall, reminders have no effect.	Alexander K. Koch, Dan Mønster,  Julia Nafziger
d2_s01_rg	d2_s01_rg	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Decision Theory & Bounded Rationality	NIKLAS	WITZIG	4be4d7	University of Mainz	Behavioral Time Allocation	How much time humans allocate to solving a given task is a fundamental question relevant to many scientific disciplines. However, evidence on the behavioral, cognitive and psychological determinants of time allocation decisions is scarce. In this study, we aim to shed light on some of these factors by developing a theoretical model for behavioral time allocation and test the model's predictions with an experiment.<br><br><br>We develop a model that links time allocation decisions to behavioral assessments of the decision problem, i.e., subjective beliefs, weighting of solution probabilities and perceived cognitive uncertainty in time-allocation decisions. To test the model's predictions, we run an experiment featuring a simple visual search task. The task abstracts from many complexities relevant to real world time allocation decisions and in turn focuses on an agent&rsquo;s ability to solve a given problem. This design allows for clean measures of performance in different pre-allocated solution times, beliefs about own performance, and task and solution time specific uncertainty aversion. To relate our experimental measures to time allocation decisions, we introduce a cost-of-time parameter. In a subsequent stage of the experiment, participants endogenously choose their decision time and thus solve a tradeoff between more decision time and a reduced expected payoff for a correct solution. Participants decide in two scenarios. Firstly, one where they prospectively select a specific decision time for a number of upcoming tasks. Secondly, in a setting, where the time allocation decision is taken simultaneously while solving each task individually. We implement each of these two tasks with a high and a low cost-of-time parameter. The experiment was conducted in June and July 2021. First results show that consistent with the model, participants do not optimally choose decision time. Specifically, when facing a high cost of time, people take too much time and when facing a low cost of time, they take too little time compared to a rational action. Furthermore, people with overoptimistic beliefs take less time in our task and uncertainty-averse subjects tend to take more time compared to more uncertainty-neutral subjects. This is a novel finding, emphasizing the role of individual beliefs and uncertainty attitudes as drivers for time (mis)allocation decisions.	Alexander Dzionara, Niklas Witzig
d2_s01_rg	d2_s01_rg	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Decision Theory & Bounded Rationality	KEYU	WU	606760	University of Zurich	Context-dependent perceptions and decision making	A plethora of observations show that people&rsquo;s perceptions and decisions are dependent on contextual information, but the direction of contextual influences remains puzzling and not well understood. For example, previously evaluated products can reduce the perceived value of the next product, but equally often the opposite occurs, raising the question under which conditions contextual influences are positive or negative. I propose a simple framework that rests on two fundamental perceptual forces of context-dependence identified in neuroscience and psychophysics that predict opposing directional influences of contextual information. With a core new hypothesis, this framework enables a unifying explanation of seemingly contradictory observations about the directional influence of context. As a result, the framework generates novel predictions of how the direction and the strength of contextual influence depend on subjective uncertainty in the perception of the &ldquo;target&rdquo; to be evaluated, subjective uncertainty in the perceived contextual information, as well as the discrepancy between the two perceptions. This framework can parsimoniously account for many observations and generate new implications in a wide range of domains, such as product perceptions, evaluations of job applicants, perceived trustworthiness of politicians, and acceptability of wages. From a set of new experiments on investment decision-making that allows the new predictions of the framework to be tested, results show that investment decisions can be manipulated by context in ways that are consistent with the model&rsquo;s three new comparative statics predictions.	Keyu Wu
d2_s01_rg	d2_s01_rg	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room G	Decision Theory & Bounded Rationality	AURORA	GARCÍA-GALLEGO	f01c10	UNIVERSITAT JAUME I	An Experiment on Herding	<br>Herding emerges when people take sequential decisions and they imitate the behavior of their predecessors. Such behavior usually comes up because agents, when trying to take the best decision, rule out their private signals and tend to believe that the others have better information. In his seminal paper, Banerjee (1992) explained herd behavior by proposing the example of choosing a restaurant. In that paper, the baseline assumption was that restaurants were of different qualities. The main result is that people converge, by means of imitation, to the worst option in the market. However, what if the restaurants were of the same quality? Can initial random events create &ldquo;queues&rdquo; favoring one option in the absence of any other underlying difference? Can these difference persist or will learning make them disappear?<br><br><br><br><br><br>In this paper we investigate the emergence and effects of herding behavior in an experiment in which subjects have to choose between two identical (by design but unknown to the subjects) options. We design two treatments, one with just a private signal, and one in which we introduce an additional public signal. As expected, both signals have a positive effect on the choice. Moreover, the length of the existing queue has a significant and positive impact on the choice in all scenarios. Interestingly our results show that if restaurants are of low quality, the subjects tend to underestimate the effect of the signals and overestimate the queue, thus favoring herding.<br><br><br><br><br><br>Background:<br><br><br>The behavior of individuals in a group acting collectively without centralized direction. Herd behavior occurs in animals in herds, packs, bird flocks, fish schools and so on, as well as in humans. Demonstrations, riots, general strikes, sporting events, religious gatherings, everyday decision-making, judgement and opinion-forming, are all forms of human herd behavior. Several explanations of herd behavior have been proposed among which, conformism (we prefer not to look too different), imitation of &laquo; successful others &raquo;, trusting the opinion of the majority, avoiding missing the &laquo; good luck &raquo; of your peers or sharing &laquo; bad luck &raquo; with others and &laquo; information cascades &raquo;, to name a few.<br><br><br><br><br><br>Markets are supposed to &ldquo;learn and progressively reflect quality on price differences. For example, However, herding behavior can be an obstacle to the functioning of the market and its ability to reflect quality differences on prices. Several studies have dealt with herding behavior. Among them, related to our study are Banerjee (1992) and Bikhchandani et al. (1992) who deal with herding and information cascades, respectively. More recent studies include: &Ccedil;elen and Kariv (2004), Drehmann et al. (2007), Eyster and Rabin (2010), Cipriani and Guarino (2011) and Moretti (2011).<br><br><br><br><br><br>Experimental design:<br><br><br>Four treatments combine the high or low quality of the &ldquo;restaurants&rdquo; available to choose from, with whether a public signal exists from an &ldquo;expert&rdquo;. Thus, treatments are:<br><br><br>HE: Both restaurants are of high quality and there is an &ldquo;expert&rdquo; (random) opinion<br><br><br>HNE: Both restaurants are of high quality and there is NO &ldquo;expert&rdquo; (random) opinion<br><br><br>LE: Both restaurants are of low quality and there is an &ldquo;expert&rdquo; (random) opinion<br><br><br>LNE: Both restaurants are of low quality and there is NO &ldquo;expert&rdquo; (random) opinion<br><br><br>In treatments with H, food is good with probability 0.75, whereas in treatments with L food is good with probability 0.25. A total of 240 participants participated in the experiment. In each treatment: a session of 60 subjects (6 independent groups of 10 people). Each subject decides once every 10 periods (5 times), choosing to eat in restaurant A or B. In each block of 10 periods, decisions are sequential by all subjects in a group, but in random order (you decide to eat in each 10-period sub-session but you do not know your order.<br><br><br><br><br><br>Results:<br><br><br>Despite the (by design) equality of the two options, a general pattern concerns the persistence of queues in a &ldquo;favored&rdquo; restaurant, in most of the experimental groups. Furthermore, people follow the signals, exhibiting an ability to learn to trust more the good signal in the presence of high quality restaurants and the bad signal in the presence of low quality restaurants. Econometric analysis indicated that the probability of herding (choosing the option where the longest queue is present) depends positively on the order in which one arrives at the point of choice, the length of the existing queue, and whether a good signal was observed in the presence of high quality restaurants. On the contrary, the probability of queuing decreases over time, in the presence of low quality restaurants.<br><br><br><br><br><br>Conclusions:<br><br><br>There is not sufficient evidence of "learning" not to discriminate. Subjects are affected by early signals ("experts' experience") and queues are observed, especially in the high quality case. Therefore, some "mature" markets like good quality wine and expensive restaurants may have been artificially led to a point where "champions" in the consumer's choice exist without an underlying quality difference.<br><br><br>	Annarita Colasante, Aurora García-Gallego, Nikolaos Georgantzis, Gabriele Tedeschi
d2_s01_ri	d2_s01_ri	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	 Other-regarding Preferences III	KATARÍNA	ČELLÁROVÁ	286ba9	MASARYK UNIVERSITY	Self selection, competition, and the willingness to share	Political leaders are often chosen through competition. The candidate must put money and effort to the election campaign, while the return of this investment is uncertain. Therefore, people with specific value sets, can be over-proportionally elected as leaders. We study  whether people self-select to the position with power in the laboratory experiment. Two players can compete for a right to distribute resources between themselves, and a third, uninvolved player.  Even though both players suggest the final allocation, we implement only the winner&rsquo;s decision. We measure self-selection by difference of transfers between winners and losers in two treatments. We ask both winners and leaders to know what would happen if other type won. In addition, we account for the effect of wealth in a control treatment without the investment stage . We find substantial self-selection to the position of power &ndash; people who invested more in the contest treatment transferred significantly less than those who invested less, and this result is not driven by wealth. Both winning the contest and engaging in it have a significant negative effect on sharing.	Katarína Čellárová
d2_s01_ri	d2_s01_ri	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	 Other-regarding Preferences III	EVGENIYA	CHABANOVA	76d24c	University of Mainz, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main	Strategic group identity choice and discrimination in labor markets	A large body of evidence shows that group identity fosters cooperation, coordination, and trust. However, little is known about exploitation of group identity to justify self-serving behavior. We use a novel laboratory experiment to study whether, and if so to what extent, people make strategic group identity choices to behave opportunistically in the context of labor markets. At the beginning, participants work in groups for two distinct firms, creating two potential group identities. Subsequently, participants in the role of a principal make wage offers to participants in the role of agents for a newly founded firm. As our treatment, we vary the disclosure of agents&rsquo; employment history to the principal, i.e., their previously shared group memberships. We conjecture that participants strategically search for or avoid additional information about agents&rsquo; employment histories to find dissimilarities. Finding dissimilarities allows principals to identify strategically with the non-shared group to justify outgroup wage discrimination.	Kevin Bauer, Evgeniya Chabanova, Florian Hett
d2_s01_ri	d2_s01_ri	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	 Other-regarding Preferences III	ARIANNA	GALLIERA	0a3079	Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore	Response to institutional changes in dictator games and cognitive skills: Evidence from children	We investigate the response to changes in the institutional setting of dictator games within a lab-in-the-field experiment involving primary school students in El Salvador. Students play variants of the dictator game allowing the option to take and starting off relative unequal initial endowments. We exploit within-subject variation and find that children are sensitive to the widening of the choice-set, with a significant drop in the contributions when the take option becomes available. The effect is mainly driven by children with low cognitive skills. Conversely, irrespective of the initial inequality in the endowment and their cognitive skills levels, children converge to a similar split of the final payoff. This is consistent with inequality aversion. The results highlight the heterogeneity in the response to different changes in the institutional setting of dictator games.	Jacopo Bonan, Segiu Burlacu and Arianna Galliera
d2_s01_ri	d2_s01_ri	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	 Other-regarding Preferences III	SÖREN	HARRS	57a69a	University of Cologne	How Fairness Views Shape Support for Redistribution	Do fairness views measured in experimental games shape support for redistribution? In this paper we present data collected in a representative sample of US Americans (N=1975) throughout the coronavirus pandemic. In a set of redistributive games, we elicit fairness views on inequalities due to luck and effort at the individual level. First, we document the individual determinants of libertarian, egalitarian and meritocratic fairness ideals in US society. We then show that these fairness ideals are strongly predictive of policy support for welfare assistance in the pandemic, support for economic redistribution and voting behavior in the 2020 presidential elections. These results are robust when controlling for subjects&rsquo; political orientation and a large set of control variables. We confirm the validity of fairness views elicited in experimental games by showing that meritocratic beliefs have a much stronger effect on the policy attitudes of meritocrats than for subjects holding other fairness ideals. We also show that fairness ideals expressed in our games are highly predictive of redistribution decisions with self-interest.   Using individual-level panel data (N=499), we investigate how stable fairness views are over a period of 1.5 years in the coronavirus pandemic. This panel data allows us to test whether personal experiences during the pandemic, such as job loss, income loss or COVID-19 infections, change fairness views at the individual level.  Our paper shows how fairness views shape policy support for redistribution as central elements of peoples political ideology.	Sören Harrs and Maj-Britt Sterba
d2_s01_ri	d2_s01_ri	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room I	 Other-regarding Preferences III	NOEMI	PACE	97cf21	University of Teramo (IT), Faculty of Political Science	The effect of social distancing on trust and solidarity	This paper investigates the effect of social distancing on behavioral traits (trust, trust- worthiness, and solidarity) that are important in interpersonal relationships. Toward this goal we exploit the exogenous manipulation of social distancing provided by the different timing of stay-at-home orders issued in New York and Arizona during the COVID-19 outbreak. The experimental design also entails a between subject manipulation in order to distinguish Ingroup Vs. Outgroup effects. The results show a positive Ingroup effect on trust robust to the degree of compliance to the treatment, while we do not find evidence of significant effects on the other behavioral traits.	Antonio Filippin and Noemi Pace
d2_s01_rl	d2_s01_rl	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Games & Predictions	ANNA	CONTE	4347e6	Sapienza University of Rome	Mind the task!	The Random Preference error story pictures a subject drawing a value for the model parameter from its distribution and using that value when making her choices without any additive errors. Therefore, once the value has been drawn, alternative lotteries are evaluated, and the utility-maximising alternative is chosen. In this work, we estimate the Random Preference model of risk attitude for non-Expected Utility functionals, and, in particular, for utility functionals characterised by more than one parameter. Via Monte Carlo simulation, we show that the properties of the estimator crucially depend on the set of choice problems used.  	Anna Conte and John D. Hey
d2_s01_rl	d2_s01_rl	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Games & Predictions	VINICIUS	FERRAZ	6c04eb	Heidelberg University	Experimental Investigation of Stationary Equilibria in the Context of an Inspection Game	This paper reports a comparison of different stationary equilibrium concepts, analyzed in the context of an iterated inspection game, with framed and unframed treatments. We have applied the standard concepts (Nash equilibrium, quantal response equilibrium, payoff-sampling equilibrium, action-sampling equilibrium, and impulse balance equilibrium) and introduced five concept modifications, as choice prediction models. The introduced conceptual assessment included a comprehensive analysis of the models&rsquo; features, as well as three experimental analysis dimensions: aggregated data, time-series, and gameplay level. Our results reinforced the lack of predictive power of the Nash equilibrium and outlined the action-sampling equilibrium as the best predictor for the introduced design. Complementarily, the modifications based on loss aversion and inequity aversion resulted in models with high predictive potential, but higher parameter estimation complexity. Lastly, the quantification of loss aversion in the impulse balance equilibrium with a dynamic parameter reinforces its ability to predict behavior, while improving the model's accuracy.	Vinicius Ferraz, Thomas Pitz, Wolf Gardian, Deniz Kayar and Jörn Sickmann
d2_s01_rl	d2_s01_rl	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room L	Games & Predictions	KATY	TABERO	8c96f3	Durham University	The Individual-Team Discontinuity Effect on Institutional Choices: Experimental Evidence in Voluntary Public Goods Provision	Teams are known to be more cognitively able, and accordingly behave more efficiently, than individuals. This paper provides the first experimental evidence of the so-called &ldquo;individual-team discontinuity effect&rdquo; in an institutional setting. In a finitely repeated public goods game where sanctioning institutions are available, teams sustain cooperation surprisingly better than individuals. The superiority of teams is driven by their effective use of punishment. Given an opportunity to construct a formal sanction scheme in their groups, teams enact deterrent schemes by voting much more frequently than individuals. When peer-to-peer punishment is possible, teams inflict costly punishment more frequently on low contributors than individuals, thereby reducing the relative frequency of &ldquo;misdirected&rdquo; punishment among teams. These results underscore the effectiveness of having teams as a decision-making unit in organizations in mitigating collective action dilemmas.	Dr Kenju Kamei, Katy Tabero
d2_s01_rm	d2_s01_rm	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Charitable Giving II	MAJA	ADENA	b8a464	WZB Social Science Research Center Berlin	Does online fundraising increase charitable giving? A nation-wide field experiment on Facebook	Does online fundraising increase charitable giving? Using the Facebook advertising tool, we implemented a natural field experiment across Germany, randomly assigning almost  8,000 postal codes to Save the Children  fundraising videos or to a pure control. We studied changes in the donation revenue and frequency for Save the Children and other  charities by postal code. Our design circumvents many difficulties inherent in studies based on click-through data, especially substitution and measurement issues. We found that  (i) video fundraising increased donation revenue and frequency to Save the Children during the campaign and in the subsequent five weeks; (ii) the campaign was profitable for the fundraiser; and (iii) the effects were similar independent of video content and impression assignment strategy. However, we also found non-negligible crowding out of donations to other similar charities or projects.  Finally, we demonstrated that click data are an inappropriate proxy for donations and recommend that  managers use careful experimental designs that can plausibly  evaluate the effects of  advertising on relevant outcomes.	Maja Adena, Anselm Hager
d2_s01_rm	d2_s01_rm	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Charitable Giving II	PETER	WERNER	d3c7c7	Maastricht University	Co-benefits motivate individual donations to mitigate climate change	We study the role of co-benefits &ndash; positive effects of climate protection projects in addition to CO2 reduction &ndash; for the motivation to contribute to climate change mitigation. In two artefactual field experiments conducted with large population samples from Germany (n = 2,400 in total), we test if and how the existence and specific nature of co-benefits affect donations. In both experiments, we find that co-benefits have a positive impact on contributions to climate protection. Our second experiment shows that contributions also respond to the nature of co-benefits, and these responses seem to be driven by individual donor preferences for the respective type of co-benefit. Moreover, we observe that making carbon footprints and thus individual responsibility for environmental externalities more salient increases donations irrespective of the existence and nature of co-benefits. Finally, when uncertainty about co-benefits is introduced, the majority of potential donors requests information in both experiments, and those who choose to be informed about co-benefits provide higher donations relative to subjects who choose not to be informed.	Christoph Feldhaus, Marvin Gleue, Andreas Löschel, Peter Werner
d2_s01_rm	d2_s01_rm	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Charitable Giving II	FRAUKE	STEHR	3a013b	Maastricht University	Dodging High-Impact Behavior with Motivated Beliefs	Other-regarding behavior has been researched for decades. Still, there is no consensus on when people show other-regarding behavior and when they don't. For example, the literature has documented that people like to find excuses not to donate. This is however at odds with the large amounts of money and time that are voluntarily donated each year, including to low impact charities. In this paper, I propose that behavioral patterns like these can be reconciled by accounting for the cost sensitivity of potential donors, and develop an online experiment to test these predictions. First, I propose that many people do indeed like to donate, but only as long as it is relatively inexpensive. Second, I propose that motivated beliefs about the impact of donation facilitate the tradeoff between the benefit to oneself and the benefit to the recipient. Specifically, people self-servingly over-estimate the impact of low-cost donations and under-estimate the impact of high-cost donations. In an additional treatment, I test whether these effects are stronger in real life, where donors are not forced to think about impact before making their donation decision but can rationalize their decision after the fact. Finally, I document how the decision context defined by cost and impact tradeoffs shapes beliefs about impact.	Frauke Stehr
d2_s01_rm	d2_s01_rm	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Charitable Giving II	LATA	GANGADHARAN	9d8a8d	Monash University	Persuadable or Dissuadable Altruists? The Impact of News of Recipient Characteristics on Giving	We investigate how news about recipients&rsquo; characteristics affects donors&rsquo; giving as opposed to when no news is available. In a rational model in which news causes a donor to update her assessment of the recipient&rsquo;s deservingness, we introduce the idea that altruism can be &ldquo;persuadable&rdquo; by good news or &ldquo;dissuadable&rdquo; by bad news. We report data from three experiments in which donors are provided news regarding three recipient characteristics: alcoholism, attending courses, and disability. Across different characteristics, our results are broadly consistent with the predictions of persuadable altruism. Overall, the net impact on aggregate giving of providing news is positive.   	Lata Gangadharan,  Philip J. Grossman, Lingbo Huang,  C. Matthew Leister, Erte Xiao
d2_s01_rm	d2_s01_rm	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room M	Charitable Giving II	MATTEO MARIA	MARINI	4389d4	Masaryk University	Focal points in multiple threshold public goods games: A single-project meta-analysis	The paper is a meta-analysis of four experiments that model charitable giving as individual contributions to a multiplicity of threshold public goods vying for funding. Given the centrality of the issue of coordination as the number of public goods increases, we pool 15,936 observations at the individual level for the purpose of identifying the most effective focal points in this setting. It turns out that one such coordination device is represented by experience, since we observe an inverted U-shaped trend in the successful provision of public goods that differs from the downfall typical of one-public-good scenarios. The results also support previous evidence that making salient one of the contribution options on its own merits improves coordination, whereas the presence of an intermediary directing the funds to one of the public goods is beneficial as long as the delegate is formally obliged to allocate a high enough percentage of the transferred resources. We discuss possible implications of our findings.	Luca Corazzini & Matteo M. Marini
d2_s01_rq	d2_s01_rq	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Uncertainty & Ambiguity	GIANNA	LOTITO	a86190	Department of Economics and Statistics “Cognetti de Martiis” - University of Torino	Testing sources influence in ambiguity reaction and insensitivity	This paper investigates whether different sources of uncertainty associated with natural events influence ambiguity attitudes (where attitudes towards ambiguity are expressed through ambiguity preferences/aversion and insensitivity to probability changes) and whether these attitudes are related to subject risk preferences. To measure ambiguity, we adopted Baillon et al.'s (2021) belief hedges approach. This approach allows us when testing ambiguity to concentrate only on belief elicitation avoiding assumptions over the utility function. Following Baillon et al. (2021), we elicit matching probabilities for different event lotteries in order to elicit the preference towards ambiguity (that is measured by the b index) and the insensitivity towards probability (that is measured by the a index). Our research hypothesis is that different sources of ambiguity can influence differently the motivational component of ambiguity reaction (i.e., the b index) and the degree of ambiguity perceived by subjects, i.e., their sensitivity to changes in likelihoods (i.e., the a index). Moreover, we are using affect-rich scenarios against no affect-rich scenarios controlling for competence as further elements affecting ambiguity. On November 23rd, 2021, a pilot experiment was run on a group of eighty-five student subjects (53% females) from the University of Torino attending an MSc level course in statistics and decision making. Subjects had to evaluate two uncertain prospects. The experimental design followed Baillon et al.'s (2018) three-fold partition. In the first scenario, subjects had to evaluate the number of people testing positive for the SARS-CoV-2 (Covid-19) virus in Italy on November 27th, 2021. (The event space partitioned at 7,000 and 12,500 cases.) In a second scenario, subjects had to evaluate the outcome (home win, draw, away win) of the top (Serie A) Italian football tournament match between Juventus and Atalanta, which was played on November 27th, 2021. For each of the two scenarios, the subjects evaluated 6 different binary prospects, paying 15 euros if some event occurred and nothing otherwise, by stating the corresponding matching probability. Prospects were randomized for each individual within each scenario, but the order of presentation was the same (first Covid-19, then football). In addition, experimental subjects had to self-report, on a seven-point Likert scale, their emotional involvement and the degree of information as regards the two scenarios. The questionnaire contained also one question measuring risk attitudes as in Assandri et al. (2018). The experimental data showed that the two scenarios were associated with statistically significant differences in subjects&rsquo; emotional reaction (mean self-reported emotion= 5 for Covid-19 and =3.5 for football, t-test=-5.4) and implied different knowledge of the decision context (mean self-reported information= 5.1 for Covid and =3.4 for football), with larger variances for football. However, no statistically significant differences in ambiguity reaction between scenarios were found. Regressions of b and a-indexes on gender and risk attitudes (clustering errors by individuals) showed that more risk averse subjects were both more ambiguity averse and more a-insensitive for Covid-19, with no role for gender. As regards football, a-insensitivity was higher for females and more risk averse subjects, whereas no effect was detected on ambiguity attitudes. In May 2022 an additional experiment was run with 130 subjects and additional treatments and scenarios.  References Assandri, M., Maffioletti, A., Piacenza, M., Turati, G. (2018), &ldquo;Risk Attitudes and Preferences for Redistribution: New Evidence from the Lab&rdquo;, CESifo Economic Studies, 64(3): 489&ndash;515. Baillon, A., Huang, Z., Selim, A. and Wakker, P.P. (2018). &ldquo;Measuring ambiguity attitudes for all (natural) events&rdquo;. Econometrica, 16: 1839-1858. Baillon, A., Bleichrodt, H., Li, C. and Wakker, P.P. (2021). &ldquo;Belief hedges: Measuring ambiguity for all events and all models&rdquo;. Journal of Economic Theory, 198, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jet.2021.105353.	Gianna Lotito, Anna Maffioletti, Michele Santoni
d2_s01_rq	d2_s01_rq	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Uncertainty & Ambiguity	PETER	DUERSCH	744a00	University of Mannheim	Choice under Uncertainty and Cognitive Load	This paper reports on an experiment that investigates how exposure to cognitive load affects behavior in the presence of uncertainty. Cognitive load is induced by a memorizing task (zero, two and six digits). Subjects face a series of simple binary tasks between prospects, testing monotonicity, stochastic dominance, reduction of compound lotteries, risk attitudes, and ambiguity attitudes. Our data shows that cognitive load reduces subjects&rsquo; adherence to stochastic dominance, and reduction of compound lotteries. This effect is driven by subjects with high cognitive ability. However, cognitive load has no impact on monotonicity and ambiguity attitudes. Under a dual-self interpretation, our findings suggest that ambiguity aversion is intuitive not reasoned.	Adam Dominiak; Peter Duersch
d2_s01_rq	d2_s01_rq	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Uncertainty & Ambiguity	KATHARINA	HARTINGER	9d0fe7	KU Eichstaett-Ingolstadt	Play Stupid Games, Win Stupid Prizes	We use slot machine games to study economic decision-making in complex high-uncertainty environments. Despite monetary stakes, roughly 30 percent of study participants adopt a non-Bayesian strategy tied to the game's entropy. This playful-exploratory approach leads to suboptimal game switching behavior compared to an optimal choice in the Bayesian multi-armed bandit model. We explain this by a model of expected-utility-maximizing agents choosing between a rational Bayesian and a curiosity-driven perspective.   A set of treatments capture and disentangle this deliberate rationality-curiosity trade-off: By changing key game features, such as the stakes, we increase the opportunity cost of curious behavior. By offering additional, albeit payoff-neutral, choices, we allow players to explore within the payoff-maximizing strategy.   Comparing in-game behavior to the predictions, we find that a significant share of players choose to incorporate elements of competitiveness into their approach to the game and seem to acquire inherently valuable but potentially costly non-Bayesian beliefs about the nature of the game.   Our new approach contributes to a better understanding of how economic agents deal with unusual, high-uncertainty environments---as seen in the context of trading apps that explicitely combine gambling and trading elements.	Katharina Hartinger, Alexander Patt
d2_s01_rq	d2_s01_rq	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Uncertainty & Ambiguity	ORESTIS	KOPSACHEILIS	b4ca4f	Technical University of Munich	The Description - Experience Gap in Cooperation	Many people are conditionally cooperative: they cooperate if others do so as well. Conditional cooperation is usually investigated in settings where the choices of others are known. In many settings, however, there is uncertainty about the cooperativeness of others. Using a novel experimental protocol, we manipulate the information that subjects receive regarding the likelihood that their partner cooperates in a Prisoner&rsquo;s Dilemma game , and whether these likelihoods are described unambiguously or learned through experience and thus ambiguous. In all treatments, subjects&rsquo; cooperation rate increases monotonically with the likelihood that their partner cooperates. Comparing decisions made under description to those made under experience, we observe a description-experience gap in which rare events appear to be more influential under experience than under description. This finding contrasts earlier results from the individual choice literature, which typically suggests the opposite pattern. We argue that stronger priors under social uncertainty than under individual uncertainty can account for part of this difference. In a second experiment, we confirm that subjects are more confident in their prior under social uncertainty. 	Orestis Kopsacheilis, Ozan Isler, Dennie van Dolder
d2_s01_rq	d2_s01_rq	2 Sep 2022	09:00 - 10:30	Room Q	Uncertainty & Ambiguity	JONATHAN	CHAPMAN	56397c	UNIVERSITY OF BOLOGNA	Looming Large or Seeming Small?  Attitudes Towards Losses in a Representative Sample	We measure individual-level loss aversion using three incentivized representative surveys of the U.S.\ population (combined N=3,000). We find that around 50% of the U.S. population is loss tolerant, with many participants accepting negative expected values gambles. This is counter to expert predictions, and earlier findings---which mostly come from lab/student samples - that 70-90% of participants are loss averse. Consistent with the difference between our study and the prior literature, loss aversion is more prevalent in people with high cognitive ability. Loss-tolerant individuals are more likely to report gambling recently and to have experienced financial shocks. These results support the general hypothesis that individuals value gains and losses differently, although the tendency in a large proportion of the population to emphasize gains over losses is an overlooked behavioral phenomenon.	Jonathan Chapman, Erik Snowberg, Stephanie Wang, Colin Camerer
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	ANNA	SCHWARZ	58b40f	VIENNA UNIVERSITY OF ECONOMICS & BUSINESS	Never settle for average - Examining heterogeneity in information treatment effects on perceptions of intergenerational mobility	Recently, an extensive literature using randomized survey experiments has shown that information about inequality and intergenerational mobility changes people&rsquo;s beliefs, but hardly affects their demand for redistribution. While previous work is mostly concerned with the latter, we focus our analysis on the first stage, i.e. the effect of information on perceptions. Drawing on evidence from a randomized survey experiment in Austria, we show that the information treatment about low intergenerational mobility popularized by Alesina, Stantcheva, and Teso (2018) induces heterogeneous effects on perceptions. Specifically, low income earners perceive the highest levels of intergenerational mobility and are least convinced by information contradicting this belief, while the opposite is true for high income earners. We further provide evidence, that the low income group does not update beliefs, because belief in high mobility has an instrumental value for them, i.e. acts as a motivator, following B&eacute;nabou and Tirole (2006). We replicate the heterogeneity in treatment effects by income for the US using the original data from Alesina, Stantcheva, and Teso (2018) and for Germany relying on data from a similar survey experiment conducted by Fehr, Muller, Preuss, et al. (2020). As the group responsible for most of the shifts in perceptions has few incentives to change its redistributive preferences in response to perceiving lower mobility, it may seem less surprising that the average movements in perceptions do not translate into clear effects on demand for redistribution. Indeed, we find only small and even partly negative effects on demand for redistribution for high-income earners, who update their beliefs most, while low-income earners only marginally change preferences for redistribution. Aside from political cleavages, our results suggest that beliefs motivated by economic circumstances also play a role in why we do not see more demand for redistribution.  - Alesina, Alberto, Stefanie Stantcheva, and Edoardo Teso (2018): &ldquo;Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Redistribution&rdquo;. In: American Economic Review 108.2, 521&ndash;554. - B&eacute;nabou, Roland and Jean Tirole (2006): &ldquo;Belief in a just world and redistributive politics&rdquo;. In: The Quarterly journal of economics Vol. 121(2), pp. 699&ndash;746. - Fehr, Dietmar, Daniel Muller, Marcel Preuss, et al. (2020): &ldquo;Social Mobility Perceptions and Inequality Acceptance&rdquo;. In: Working Papers in Economics and Statistics, University of Innsbruck.	Anna Schwarz, Philipp Warum
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	LISA	SPANTIG	7e4205	RWTH AACHEN UNIVERSITY	Cooperation and the Signaling Value of Incentives: An Experiment in a Company	Economists and management scholars have argued that the scope of incentives to increase cooperation in organizations is limited as their use signals the prevalence of free-riding among employees. This paper tests this hypothesis experimentally, using a sample of managers and employees from a large company with a cooperative culture. We exogenously vary whether managers are informed about prevailing cooperation levels among employees before they can set incentives to promote cooperation. Comparing informed versus uninformed incentive choices, the data reveals strong positive effects of incentives that are unaffected by the hypothesized signaling effect. The absence of such effect seems related to the perception of managers' intentions, a mitigating factor that has not been explored in the literature so far.	Marvin Deversi, Lisa Spantig
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	SABRINA	KIERSPEL	25a6bf	Chair in Empirical Economics Otto-von-Guericke University	Giving Less after Being Generous: An Experiment on Donation Behavior	In this paper, we focus on individuals&rsquo; decisions to give for charitable reasons, examining whether specific experiences of the donor or factors related to the recipient influence the donor&rsquo;s willingness to donate and the amount they donate. We hereby consider the distance in wealth between the (potential) donor and recipient as well as the recipient&rsquo;s neediness. Specifically, we investigate whether similar charitable giving behavior can be observed in situations with the recipients located in the gains or loss domain. We hereby conduct laboratory dictator game experiments involving real losses. Our results show that donors&rsquo; behavior is influenced by both the size of the monetary distance between donor and recipient and the initial endowment, i.e., the neediness, of the recipient. We find recipients&rsquo; endowments to be robust predictors of donation. However, social preferences are highly correlated with donors&rsquo; behavior only after they have made experiences with recipients who were particularly needy, or more precisely, after they have met recipients located in the loss domain. A horse race among five (simple) behavioral models reveals that donors give recipients the same proportion in terms of utility when the recipients are in the gains domain as when they are in the loss domain.	Thomas Neumann, Sabrina Kierspel, and Bodo Vogt
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	JOSE JAVIER	DOMINGUEZ	36bf5f	University of Granada	An Experimental Study on the Impact of Information About Labor Market Inequalities	This paper aims to investigate the effect of information provision in reducing the gender gap in labour market outcomes. The gender gap in early-career outcomes (e.g. employability, wage) in male-dominated occupations has been well-documented. A proportion of this gap is explained from both sides of the labour market: a) employers are less likely to select women as leaders, and b) women themselves are less willing to compete. We design a lab experiment composed by three parts: a questionnaire, a demand-side game and a supply-side game. The questionnaire includes questions regarding labour market inequalities. In the demand-side game, subjects are asked to hire three candidates from a pool of six and assign them to different tasks that differ in complexity and profitability. In the spirit of Niederle and Vesterlund (2007), the supply-side game asks subjects to decide the payment scheme they prefer (piece-rate vs tournament). Information provision takes the form of feedback. Subjects in the feedback treatment were presented with a report answering the questions formulated in the questionnaire. We find that feedback provision a) increases the probability of female candidates to be assigned to the most complex task in comparison to the baseline and b) increases the probability of women of entering in competitions. We also find that only 40% of subjects are accurate in their knowledge about labour market inequalities. The findings have important policy implications since information provision can overcome the use of gender biases in crucial labour market decisions.	Francesca Barigozzi, Natalia Montinari, José J. Domínguez
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	STEPHANIE	HEGER	c58a53	University of Bologna	Learning to Give: Professional versus Consumer Reviews	We estimate and compare the effect of information from receiving professional versus consumer reviews on consumer behavior. We do so in a pro-social context and move beyond the existing literature to examine how two distinct sources of information, professional reviews versus consumer reviews, differentially affect individual's willingness to give to a charity. We find that individuals place significantly more value on professional reviews than on equivalent consumer reviews. However, when individuals receive a second piece of information they update their willingness to donate similarly regardless of the source: individuals' willingness to donate is unaffected by ``good news" about the charity, but negatively affected by ``bad" news.	NA
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	MARIE CLAIRE	VILLEVAL	afb3da	GATE (CNRS-University of Lyon) and IZA, Bonn	Do Job Seekers (Really) Procrastinate?	Labor economists have long hypothesized that time discounting influences individuals&rsquo; job search, but the precise mechanism by which it affects search efforts and outcomes remains largely unknown. If present bias plays a role, is it because job seekers are financially impatient or because they tend to procrastinate on effort? Using a longitudinal online experiment with job seekers and two elicitation methods, we provide a direct measure of short run and long run time preferences over both money and effort, and investigate how these preferences interfere with job search effort and outcomes. Recovering time preferences from monetary choices, we confirm that impatient and present biased job seekers provide lower levels of search effort than time consistent individuals, which subsequently delays their job finding. In contrast, when recovering time preferences over effort, patience and present bias correlate neither with the level of search effort, nor its outcomes. This suggests that present bias over money and procrastination capture different individual attributes, and that job search is more affected by financial trade-offs than by arbitrages over leisure.	Maxime Le Bihan, Marie Claire Villeval
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	SIMON	MATHEX	0094d2	Center for environmental economics Montpellier	How to distinguish economic from moral compensation in the rebound effect ? A theoretical and experimental approach	The energy savings expected after an improvement in the energy efficiency of a service may be partially offset by increased use of that service (Greening et al., 2000). This increase in consumption generates a gap between theoretical and real energy savings. This difference is called the rebound effect and has mostly been attributed to economic compensation mechanisms like substitution and income effects (Sorrell et al., 2008). However, moral compensation mechanisms either through moral licensing effect or moral cleansing effect can also modify consumption behaviors and impact the rebound effect (Tiefenbeck et al. 2013 ; Clot et al., 2016 ; Dorner, 2019). To date, empirical estimates of the magnitude of the rebound effect do not distinguish between economic and moral compensation (Sorrell et al., 2009 ; Gillingham et al., 2016). However, it can be assumed that the proportion of each of these compensations in the rebound effect can vary greatly depending on the study context considered. This can lead to different implications for policymakers, particularly in terms of solutions to limit the rebound effect. To distinguish these two types of compensation, we propose a theoretical model and a decontextualized online experiment based on a modified version of a charity game. In our experimental setup, we consider a 2 x 4 between design: economic impact of technological improvement x moral impact of technological improvements, with 2 controls. Participants (n=1600) must trade-off, given a budget constraint, between their personal interest and the donation to a carbon offset organization. A technological improvement is simulated by changing the parameters of this arbitrage and to observe a moral compensation effect, some participants have to read a short positive or negative text about the environmental effort. Our results show that technological improvement can reduce pro-environmental efforts and generate a rebound effect through an economic compensation mechanism. In our experiment, the induction of a good deed does not generate a moral licensing effect, but reduces the rebound effect by a consistency effect. We also found evidence that inducing environmental guilt in individuals generates a cleansing effect, which reduce the rebound effect. Finally, we discuss the importance of these moral compensation mechanisms in relation to the problem of the rebound effect.   References:  Clot, S., Grolleau, G., and Ibanez, L. (2016). Do good deeds make bad people? European Journal of Law and Economics, 42(3):491&ndash;513.  Dorner, Z. (2019). A behavioral rebound effect. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 98:102257.  Gillingham, K., Rapson, D., and Wagner, G. (2016). The Rebound Effect and Energy Efficiency Policy. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 10(1), 68&ndash;88.  Greening, L. A., Greene, D. L., and Difiglio, C. (2000). Energy efficiency and consumption - the rebound effect - a survey. Energy Policy, 389&ndash;401.  Sorrell, S., and Dimitropoulos, J. (2008). The rebound effect: Microeconomic definitions, limitations and extensions. Ecological Economics, 65(3), 636&ndash;649.  Sorrell, S., Dimitropoulos, J., and Sommerville, M. (2009). Empirical estimates of the direct rebound effect: A review. Energy Policy, 37(4):1356&ndash;1371.  Tiefenbeck, V., Staake, T., Roth, K., and Sachs, O. (2013). For better or for worse? Empirical evidence of moral licensing in a behavioral energy conservation  campaign. Energy Policy, 57:160&ndash;171.  	Simon Mathex, Lisette Ibanez, Raphaële Préget
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	SIBILLA	DI GUIDA	d99aa7	Syddansk Universitet	The impact of learning on heuristic based choice	In this experimental based research, we investigate the dynamics of learning in interactive situations, where feedback is limited, and experience is based on non-identical settings. We show that, when facing complex situations, people interpret and approach them following the simplest heuristic that fit the observed pattern, neglecting more complex (but still fitting) strategies. Once learned, people will apply the heuristic even in different settings, where the heuristic is a sub-optimal strategy. Instead, when simple heuristics are not provided, people are able to understand and apply more complex strategies, which can be effectively used in different settings. We show that unambiguous information &ndash; albeit complex &ndash; leads to more versatile and effective performances. Finally, the impact and applicability of different heuristics is discussed. 	Polonio Luca
d2_s02_ra	d2_s02_ra	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room A	Lightning V	MARIA	POLIPCIUC	47057d	Institute for Markets and Strategy, Vienna University of Economics and Business	Testing the Elicitation Procedure of the Minimum Acceptable Probability	Betrayal aversion has been shown to be an important determinant of trust (Bohnet and Zeckhauser, 2004). We study whether the way betrayal aversion is identified (as a difference in Minimum Acceptable Probabilities, MAPs) is affected by beliefs about one&rsquo;s prospects. In a within-subject design, we find that MAPs are lower the worse the prospects one faces. This is similar to the distributional dependence of valuations elicited using the Becker&ndash;DeGroot&ndash;Marschak mechanism, of which MAPs are a special case. Our results suggest that distributional dependence should be accounted for when eliciting MAPs to isolate betrayal aversion.	Maria Polipciuc, Martin Strobel
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	KAI	BARRON	b9bc1e	WZB Berlin	Narrative Persuasion	Narratives play an important role in the domain of finance, where different financial advisors propose heterogeneous narratives (or models) purporting to explain the recent performance of the stock market and predicting what it will do next. Often these financial advisors&rsquo; incentives are not fully aligned with those of the individuals they are advising. This leaves scope for self-interested persuasion using narratives. In this paper, we use an experiment with several pre-registered treatment conditions (N=1440) to explore the mechanisms driving this form of persuasion. Our results reveal several striking behavioural phenomena. First, we show that misaligned advisors are able to shift investors&rsquo; beliefs about the future performance of a company significantly by constructing sophisticated narratives that are misleading, but fit the publicly available historical company data well. This harms investors and benefits the advisors. Second, we present evidence on the efficacy of several potential interventions that may protect investors. We show that making advisor incentives salient can help to ameliorate investor gullibility, but other interventions struggle to overcome this type of persuasion. Third, we show that when investors have a stake in a company, they engage in motivated narrative construction, interpreting the public data in a way that allows them to hold optimistic beliefs about the company&rsquo;s future performance. This effect is especially strong when investors took an active investment decision themselves	Kai Barron and Tilman Fries
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	LARA MARIE	BERGER	2a2a52	University of Cologne	How digital media markets amplify news sentiment	An important source of media bias is newspapers tailoring their content toward their readers&rsquo; preferences. On digital media markets news companies can learn in a fine-grained way what their readers like. Does this new knowledge enhance the media&rsquo;s slant? In this paper I provide evidence that this is the case for a bias in terms of sentimental framing. I empirically show that the headlines of big German and English news outlets are more emotional online as opposed to offline. In an experiment with professional journalists I show that this difference at least partially stems from the incentive to create more clicks: If journalists are compensated relative to the click-rates their headlines generate, they significantly more often put headlines containing sentimental words on top of a given article. Such headlines in turn translate into emotional reactions and changes in expectations of their readers.	Lara Marie Müller
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	JOSE MARIA	ORTIZ	2d9a1c	ZAYED UNIVERSITY	Reading a single snippet of polarized news impacts people’s views on immigration.	Understanding the effect of polarized news on public opinion is more urgent than ever. Social media are commonly being used for spreading partisan snippets of information, which can reach millions of people, sometimes providing the first or even only exposure to a new topic. Here we explore whether isolated polarized snippets of news have an impact on people&rsquo;s opinion on one of the most divisive topics in present times: immigration. We report a large (N=4,587) pre-registered experiment demonstrating that exposure to a single negative piece of news related to a single immigrant-related incident shifts people&rsquo;s general opinion about immigration by 8.5 percentage points, relative to exposure to a symmetric positive version of the same piece of news. These results imply that people&rsquo;s general opinion about immigration can dramatically shift after exposure to polarized snippets of news about isolated incidents.  Keywords:  polarized news, opinion, immigration, controversial issues, social media	Valerio Capraro, José M. Ortiz, Anne-Marie Nussberger, Nadira S. Faber
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	THORSTEN	CHMURA	4ba9e1	Nottingham Business School	International bribery: Results from an on-line, cross-country, behavioural experiment	Bribery in international business is common despite its deleterious effect on economic and societal outcomes. A common policy response is the introduction of laws punishing bribing. We study the role of social context in international bribing and the enforcement of those laws. We administer a modified Barr-Serra (2009, 2010) bribery game to participants from nine countries in Africa, America, Asia, and Europe. We elicit social norms using the Krupka-Weber (2013) procedure. We vary the punishment for bribing: in the baseline there is no punishment, in the monitoring treatment a Monitor may choose to report the bribing attempt and then the briber will be punished with a 50:50 chance (between-subject design). We also vary the country where the participants in each group are based (within-subject design). We document that offering a bribe is more socially acceptable than taking one. However, monitoring reduces the social acceptability of bribing. In addition, we uncover regional differences in the norms regarding bribing. In our experimental game bribing is diminished in the monitoring treatment, but only when participants believe that their attempt at bribing will be reported. Participants are more likely to offer a bribe when they believe bribing is more socially acceptable and when they believe that the bribee is more likely to accept the bribe. They are less likely to offer a bribe when the Monitor is located to a country outside their own, with Germany-located Monitors being the most bribe-reducing ones. We also document an association in our sample between having experience as a public servant and being more tolerant towards bribery. Our results highlight the importance of international monitoring of corruption as well as the need to increase the salience of the enforcement of anti-corruption laws.	Thorsten Chmura, Abigail Barr, Theodoros Alysandratos, Elizabeth David-Barrett, Cormac Bryce, Marcus Giamattei
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	TAMAS	OLAH	8c5ff3	Universität Heidelberg	Social Norms regarding Data Sharing in publicly funded research	We examine descriptive and injunctive social norms among researchers with regards to data sharing and open science in publicly funded research using a variant of the Krupka &amp; Weber (2013) method with the refinement from Schmidt (2022). In order to achieve this, 281 participants (PhD students or researchers in higher career stages) were recruited online from the United States, United Kingdom, and Germany from the fields of life and social sciences. We used an incentivized between subject design with respect to injunctive and descriptive norms. Participants were asked to indicate their second order beliefs about how frequent or appropriate a certain situation related to data sharing in their field and country is. We find substantial differences between countries, but only negligible ones between fields. The gap between the attitudes and behaviors of researchers is also very small and typically not systematic, but only present in specific fields in specific countries.  Participants were also asked to report their own data sharing practices. Here we find large differences between researchers in different countries, fields, and career stages. The overwhelming majority of our subjects said to share their data, and considers it good scientific practice to do so, but also thinks mandatory data sharing impedes their own work.  Overall, we find that researchers from the United States greatly differ from their European counterparts both considering social norms and in self-reported data sharing practices. This leads us to conclude that the practice of data sharing is situated on a more formalized and institutionalized level in the US, while being driven by individual motivations in Europe.	Tamas Olah, Christiane Schwieren
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	ŽIGA	VELKAVRH	86a630	UNIVERSITY OF PRIMORSKA, FAMNIT, SLOVENIA	Experiential adaptation in human generosity	We investigate behavioral rules that people apply in a repeated economic game of indirect reciprocity. Using the statistical mixture model-based method, we estimate that most participants use fixed rules. In order to explain the nonstandard behaviors, we propose that previous estimations miss an important type of participants, motivated by personal experience rather than reciprocity. This describes almost half of the subjects in one of our experimental treatments. Experiential behavior is not driven by an immediate reaction to the most recent experience, but by an accumulated experience over many rounds. We also show that concern for own reputation diminishes in the final rounds of the experiment, which can explain the end game decline in generosity.	Žiga Velkavrh, Aljaž Ule
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	MENUSCH	KHADJAVI	0177bf	Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam	Do Scientists Tell the Truth? Global Experimental Evidence	Academic honesty is crucial for the advancement of and trust in science. Meanwhile, there are concerns around a so-called replication crisis and survey evidence reveals non-negligible questionable research practices. Motivated by identity economics theory, we provide evidence on scientists&rsquo; truth-telling by means of two online experiments. We employ an established coin-tossing task with more than 1,300 scientists, in which scientists face a trade-off between monetary incentives for lying and honest reporting. Specifically, we compare reporting behavior between two treatments, either making the private or professional identity salient. In Experiment I with 437 mostly European and North American marine scientists, we find that fewer scientists over-report winning tail tosses in the professional identity treatment. In Experiment II with 864 scientists from diverse academic disciplines and world regions, we find heterogeneous effects across groups and do not replicate the main result from Experiment I invariably. While we replicate the effect for North American scientists, we find the opposite for Southern European and East Asian scientists. Our data significantly correlates with existing country-specific (dis)honesty data. Our findings highlights the importance of professional and societal honesty norms to curb misconduct.	Moritz Drupp, Menusch Khadjavi, Rudi Voss
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	ODA KRISTINE	SUND	66b82c	UNIVERSITY OF AMSTERDAM	Unleveling the Playing Field? Experimental evidence on parents' Willingness to Give Their Children an Advantage	Parents make many important choices that shape the opportunities and outcomes of their children. This paper studies parents' willingness to unlevel the playing field in favor of their child in a competition against another child. I report from a large-scale lab-in-the-field experiment on 1840 parents and adolescent children, which is matched to high-quality administrative data. I provide a simple theoretical model to guide the interpretation of the results, where parents make a tradeoff between equal opportunities for all children and increasing their child's likelihood of succeeding. The study provides several novel findings. First, a significant share of the parents are willing to unlevel the playing field in favor of their own child. Second, I establish causally that parents' beliefs about the helping behavior of the other parent matter for their willingness to help their own child. Third, I provide evidence consistent with parents having self-serving beliefs. The findings show how parents may have different motivations for interfering in what would otherwise be a meritocratic competition between children; some may help to give their child an advantage; others to keep a level playing field. The findings are important for understanding how parental background may shape child development and for policy design.	Oda K. S. Sund
d2_s02_rb	d2_s02_rb	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room B	Lightning VI	FOLCO	PANIZZA	e5608d	IMT School for Advanced Studies Lucca	monetary incentives and fact-checking techniques to spot disinformation	Disinformation about science can impose enormous economic and public health burdens. A recently proposed strategy to help online users recognise false content is to follow the techniques of professional fact checkers, such as looking for information on other websites (lateral reading) and looking beyond the first results suggested by search engines (click restraint). In two preregistered online experiments (N = 5387), we simulated a social media environment and tested two interventions, one in the form of a pop-up meant to advise participants to follow such techniques, the other based on monetary incentives. We measured participants&rsquo; ability to identify whether information was scientifically valid or invalid. Analysis of participants&rsquo; search style reveals that both monetary incentives and pop-up increased the use of fact-checking strategies. Monetary incentives were overall effective in increasing accuracy, whereas the pop-up worked when the source of information was unknown. Pop-up and incentives, when used together, produced a cumulative effect on accuracy. We suggest that monetary incentives enhance content relevance, and could be combined with fact-checking techniques to counteract disinformation.	Panizza, Folco; Ronzani, Piero; Martini, Carlo; Mattavelli, Simone; Morisseau, Tiffany; Motterlini, Matteo
d2_s02_rc	d2_s02_rc	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room C	Public Goods III	VERONICA	RATTINI	678fc2	University of Milano	Identity and Cooperation in Multicultural Societies: An Experimental Investigation	The project experimentally investigates the role of identity in shaping cooperation preferences and attitudes, with specific attention to the differences between natives and immigrants. With this aim, we run a lab-in-the-field study with immigrant and native youth (6th-8th grade) in two middle schools in Bologna (Italy). For pupils from immigrant families, identity is likely to be a composite pattern of elements drawn from the parent's country of origin (ethnic markers) and elements from the host country. The project's main goal is to analyze how cooperation between individuals can be encouraged by making salient a unitary identity (e.g. living in the same city and attending the same school) rather than multiple identities (e.g. ethnicity). The results show that immigrants contribute more to the public good than natives at the baseline; however, natives increase their cooperation when the multicultural perspective is made more salient.	Natalia Montinari, Matteo Ploner, Veronica Rattini
d2_s02_rc	d2_s02_rc	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room C	Public Goods III	LENNART	STANGENBERG	78446f	University of Groningen	Don’t wait on the world to change! An experiment on how uncertain future cost reductions cause group inaction.	When individual consumption generates exponentially increasing external societal costs, there is a tension between settling the costs now or later. Building on Walker et al. (2000), we design a multi-period game, where throughout the experiment groups can correct their mistakes and decide to pay for the accrued costs. The 2&times;2 design varies how group members share the accruing costs and whether there is a chance for technological progress, i.e., an exogenous cost reduction. We find that the chance for technological progress hampers cooperation in groups: Participants vote less often for settlement in the progress treatments, and thus waste their opportunity to have a higher welfare. Thus, the hope for technological breakthroughs leads to costly inaction. Whether groups share their costs equally or proportionally has a negligible impact on voting and welfare.	Lennart Stangenberg, Adriaan R. Soetevent
d2_s02_rc	d2_s02_rc	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room C	Public Goods III	ADRIAAN	SOETEVENT	dd2ad5	University of Groningen	Sharing with Minimal Regulation? Evidence from Neighborhood Book Exchange	Informal peer-to-peer services to share or barter goods often succumb to free riding behavior because they lack the tools to enforce compliance and reciprocity. We collect unique quantitative data on a form of unregulated peer-to-peer in kind exchange that appears internationally viable: the free exchange of books via privately-owned public bookcases, also known as little free libraries. Other than previously studied honor-based exchanges, little free libraries use a non-monetary one-to-one book exchange rate. We find surprisingly limited free riding in this market. Users return 9 books for every 10 taken. An incentivized survey points to strong social norms and preferences for cooperation among owners and users as key behavioral primitives that can explain the observed high and stable level of reciprocal exchange.	Anouk Schippers and Adriaan Soetevent
d2_s02_rc	d2_s02_rc	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room C	Public Goods III	DANAE	ARROYOS-CALVERA	e87e14	UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM	Risk and plausible deniability in public good games	It is commonly found in public good games (PGG) that uncertainty about the returns of the good leads to a decrease in contributions. We aim to provide further evidence of this effect, and to explore whether it could be driven by the plausible deniability about one&rsquo;s selfishness that risk offers: a justification for yourself that the risk made contributing futile, or towards others that you contributed but were negatively affected by risk. We explore this by varying the riskiness of the returns from a PGG and varying whether participants can excuse their contributions of 0. Contrary to most but not all previous studies, we find higher contributions in our risky treatments than in our baselines. This may be driven by participants being optimistic about receiving the highest possible MPCR; or perhaps by compensatory behaviour, which would drive up contributions to compensate for the risk. We found no difference between our risky treatments, suggesting that excuses did not lead to changes in contributions beyond those caused by the riskiness of returns. As in other areas, we find that plausible deniability is not exploited when it would justify a big departure from prosocial behaviour. The extent to which effects of plausible deniability extend to contexts other than allocation tasks (as in the seminal moral wiggle room study by Dana et al, 2007) has received considerable attention in the literature and here we offer some evidence of a limited effect in the context of public good contributions.	Danae Arroyos-Calvera & Andis Sofianos
d2_s02_rc	d2_s02_rc	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room C	Public Goods III	KONSTANTINOS	IOANNIDIS	02e208	University of Amsterdam	Social preferences and image concerns in public good contributions	When faced with a social dilemma game, there are two key types of motivations that can shape cooperative behaviour: how much others are earning (social preferences) and how my contributions make me look (image concerns). To disentangle those motivations, our treatments vary along two dimensions. First, we examine behaviour when incentives in a public good game are real or hypothetical allowing us to disentangle the role of social preferences. Second, we vary observability allowing us to assess the strength of image concerns that may influence subjects' contribution decisions (stronger when observed).	Michalis Drouvelis,  Konstantinos Ioannidis,  Steffen Kallbekken
d2_s02_rd	d2_s02_rd	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room D	Bargaining & Repeated Games	WLADISLAW	MILL	4714cc	University of Mannheim	Bargaining under the threat of a nuclear option	This paper addresses bargaining with a nuclear option. Players with access to such an option have the power to cause enormous damage to their negotiation partners. Figurative nuclear options are available in many important real-world settings and, being the ultimate threat, are often seen as effective in putting maximal pressure on the other party and as possibly efficiency-improving. On the other hand, since going nuclear is typically also very costly to the nuclear-option holder herself, the credibility of a nuclear threat is arguably doubtful. We report the results from unstructured one-shot bargaining experiments and examine whether nuclear-option holders have superior bargaining power, whether agreements become more likely, and how efficiency is affected by the presence of a nuclear option. We find that in most cases nuclear-option holders ultimately do not benefit while the other party is worse off compared to a baseline setting, particularly when the other party is intrinsically&mdash;i.e., save for the nuclear threat itself&mdash;in a strong position. Furthermore, the nuclear option reduces the number of negotiations that end in a disagreement but only when this is not efficiency-improving. Thus, the presence of a nuclear option in our bargaining setting is overall detrimental.	Franziska Heinicke, Henrik Orzen
d2_s02_rd	d2_s02_rd	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room D	Bargaining & Repeated Games	THOMAS	MCKAY	50f4b5	BI Nowegian Business School	Discounting in finite-time bargaining experiments	The experimental literature has broadly rejected the theoretical predictions of sequential bargaining models. In particular, Ochs &amp; Roth (1989) reject predictions of the finite-time alternating-offers model, setting the stage for Other Regarding Preferences. However, in a recent study Kim, Lim, &amp; Schweighofer-Kodritsch (2020) find support for bargaining model predictions in an infinite-time setting using the new effective discounting procedure, which raises the question of whether previous bargaining experiments failure to replicate theory is due to the use of the traditional shrinking pie procedure. In this paper we revisit Ochs &amp; Roth (1989) and compare treatment differences of implementing discounting by the shrinking pie procedure with treatment differences using the effective discounting procedure. Our results indicate that effective discounting procedure does not generally resolve the discrepancy between theory and data in finite-time bargaining. In addition, we implement discounting by using the bargaining delay procedure in an online experiment and find consistent behavior across all three procedures.	Tom-Reiel Heggedal and Thomas McKay
d2_s02_rd	d2_s02_rd	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room D	Bargaining & Repeated Games	NATALIE	LEE	c435fe	University of Amsterdam	Agenda-Setting Power in Legislative Bargaining	Agenda-setting power is a double-edged sword that increases the likelihood that an agent is chosen to be a proposer, but may reduce the probability that the agent is included in a winning coalition. We experimentally test the theoretical prediction of potentially negative returns to agenda-setting power in two-period legislative bargaining noted in Baron &amp; Ferejohn (1989). We find that higher agenda-setting power benefits subjects in all treatments except one where we automate the second period. In all treatments, a vast majority of subjects exhibit a strict preference for higher agenda-setting power. In line with most prior experimental literature, we find usual patterns of deviations from equilibrium predictions as well as learning towards equilibrium behavior. Finally, we find that subjects tend to choose coalition partners with similar agenda-setting power. We argue that this homophily drives the result of negative effect of agenda-setting power in the treatment where the second period is automated.	Natalie Lee, Ravideep Sethi
d2_s02_rd	d2_s02_rd	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room D	Bargaining & Repeated Games	DOMENICO	ROSSIGNOLI	07951a	Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore	Being in Someone Else’s Shoes. Order of play and non-zero equilibria in the ultimatum game	In this paper, we devise a randomized experiment to test whether the order of play in two Ultimatum Games influences the choice of players, using a sample of a thousand individuals representative of the entire Italian adult population interviewed through a CAWI questionnaire administered with IPSOS (a major polling firm).  We find that playing in the second game in the second game: i) increases the average share sent by Proposers and  2) reduces the minimum acceptable offer by Respondents.  Both effects increase the probability of reaching a non zero equilibrium (as confirmed by the empirical evidence) .  Given that no results is known to the player during the Games, we suggest a role for a raised awareness of the partner&rsquo;s preferences, preferred outcomes, and (consequently) strategies in influencing the subject&rsquo;s behavior, and consequently the equilibrium, in the second game.	NA
d2_s02_rd	d2_s02_rd	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room D	Bargaining & Repeated Games	SIMONA	CICOGNANI	add3e3	LEIDEN UNIVERSITY, DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMICS	Cooperating when the end is near: the impact of cognitive ability and task complexity	We study the relationship between cognitive ability, task complexity, and cooperation in finitely repeated social dilemmas. We do this by employing a laboratory experiment in which we borrow the design of Embrey et al. (2017) [Embrey, M., Fr&eacute;chette, G. R., and Yuksel, S. (2017). Cooperation in the finitely repeated prisoner&rsquo;s dilemma. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(1):509&ndash;551.], by adding three main novelties: i) the comparison between two different stage-games, which differ in complexity; ii) the existence of incentivized control questions and iii) a cognitive reflection test and a personality questionnaire. We aim to investigate the extent to which subjects cooperate and how deliberate cooperation is when they are exposed to different amounts of strategic complexity, focus, and comprehension. More specifically, we manipulate the complexity of the task at stake, incentivize the comprehension of the game, and control for subjects&rsquo; cognitive ability. We report that cooperation increases with experience, with no evidence of unraveling even in the last super games when subjects have gained substantial experience with the game. Furthermore, we observe that subjects with higher cognitive abilities and a better understanding of the instructions tend to cooperate more. Cooperation is easier to achieve and sustain in the Prisoner&rsquo;s Dilemma than in the cognitively more demanding Travelers&rsquo; Dilemma.	Maria Bigoni, Simona Cicognani
d2_s02_rf	d2_s02_rf	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals III	PIETRO	GUARNIERI	489a22	Department of Economics and Management, University of Pisa	Delaying and Motivating Decisions in the (Bully) Dictator Game	We investigate experimentally how decisions in the Dictator Game are affected by cognitive manipulations aimed at promoting greater reliance on deliberation. Specifically, we run an online experiment where we have 6 distinct experimental conditions resulting from the combination of 2 conditions for the Dictator Game (non-bully: the dictator is initially endowed with all the money; bully: the initial endowment is equally split), and 3 conditions for the cognitive manipulations (time delay: decisions are delayed; motivated delay: decisions are delayed and a written motivation is required; control: no manipulation). We find that the equal initial endowment leads the dictator to keep less for himself, confirming in the online setting previous evidence from the lab. Further, our findings suggest that the request to write a motivation makes subjects take less for themselves with respect to the mere request to wait some time before choosing.	Ennio Bilancini, Leonardo Boncinelli, Pietro Guarnieri, Lorenzo Spadoni
d2_s02_rf	d2_s02_rf	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals III	JOSE ALBERTO	GUERRA	021dde	Universidad de los Andes	Anti-social norms	Formal rules can partially reduce opportunistic behavior. Pro-social behavior enforced by third parties is therefore essential to achieve desirable social outcomes. But social norms do not always promote fairness. We study one anti-social norm - the "don&rsquo;t be a toad norm", as it is referred to in Colombia - that dictates people to mind their own business and not snitch on others. We implement a set of fairness games. A third party can punish unfair behavior, but those behaving unfairly can enforce the " don&rsquo;t be a toad" norm. We find that the mere possibility of enforcing this norm increases the deviation from fair social outcomes. Living in a society where this anti-social norm is present is equivalent to living in a society without third-party punishment. Players expect others to enforce the norm despite understanding that it is normatively unappealing. Incidence of this anti-social norm is associated with exposure to political violence from the mid-twentieth century, when looking down on snitches became prevalent. Our results suggest a deep, long-run cost of violent social conflict.	Leopoldo Fergusson (Universidad de los Andes), José-Alberto Guerra (Universidad de los Andes), and James Robinson (University of Chicago)
d2_s02_rf	d2_s02_rf	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals III	ERNESTO MARIA	GAVASSA PEREZ	525b57	University of Nottingham	Moral Rules and Social Preferences in Co-operation Problems	In this paper I introduce the MRC framework, which presents two theories about how impartial moral rules drive cooperative behaviour: blame avoidance, or an imperative to avoid doing what one considers as blameworthy, and praise seeking, or an imperative to do what one considers as praiseworthy. Using this new framework, I test within-subjects the extent to which these two moral rules and a set of preference-based theories (selfishness, inequality aversion, reciprocity, spite, social efficiency, and maximin) can explain people&rsquo;s attitudes to cooperation in two co-operation problems: social dilemmas, where the individual and social optima are misaligned, and common interest games, where the individual and social optima are aligned. My results suggest that the newly proposed moral rules provide substantial additional explanatory power on top on classical models of social preferences; blame avoidance ranking among the three best-performing theories at the individual level.	Ernesto Maria Gavassa Perez
d2_s02_rf	d2_s02_rf	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals III	JOHANNES	LOHSE	5d80ef	University of Birmingham	Absolute groupishness and the demand for information	Does social identity affect how decision makers consume and digest new information? We study this question through a theoretically informed experiment, employing a variant of the sender receiver game in which receivers can purchase reports from up to two senders. Depending on senders&rsquo; preferences for truth-telling, reports are either informative or not. In the baseline condition of our experiment, receivers observe senders&rsquo; incentives for reporting truthfully. In the treatment condition receivers additionally observe whether they share a group identity with the sender. Group identities are induced via a standard minimal group paradigm. We find that senders behave in line with a model that assumes senders incur a positive lying cost. Making social identity observable significantly affects information acquisition and makes receivers more prone to ignore potentially informative outgroup reports. This is especially the case when outgroup senders have higher incentives for truthtelling. This change in information acquisition has implications for optimal decision making: it negatively affects receivers&rsquo; ability to correctly infer the true state of world.	Johannes Lohse and Rebecca McDonald
d2_s02_rf	d2_s02_rf	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room F	Social Norms and Morals III	ROSTISLAV	STANEK	c3700c	Masaryk University	Adding fuel to the fire: Can cheap talk about hostile intentions trigger conflict?	Agents with extreme positions may want to trigger a conflict by making symbolic political acts, spreading fake news or violent acts. Our experimental design investigates whether a provocateur can trigger a conflict by making false cheap-talk statements. Our design closely resembles a situation where a third party tries to trigger a conflict by spreading fake news suggesting that one of the parties has hostile intentions. We also test whether the effect of such news can be reduced by providing public information about the source and its motivation or by providing an alternative source of information which is mostly accurate.  The experimental design consists of three stages. In the first stage, one of players can take costly action that is beneficial only if he starts a conflict in the third stage. This action is not observed by the second player. This stage serves as an elicitation of player&rsquo;s intentions. In the second stage, third-party sends public message about the action taken in the first stage. The third-party is incentivized to trigger a conflict in most cases. In the third-stage, players decide whether to fight or not. The experiment includes four treatments: i) control without message; ii) unknown treatment where the incentives of the third-party are unknown; iii) known treatment where the incentives of the third-party are public information; iii) multiple message treatment with one additional sender that is incentivized to tell the truth.  Our results show that there are significantly more conflicts in all treatments with message(s) compared to control treatment, there are no significant differences among treatments with messages. We do not observe any differences in the player&rsquo;s intentions to engage in conflict elicited in the first stage which suggests that players change their intentions after observing message reporting malicious intent. Malicious messages have significant and substantial effect on conflict emergence even when it is known that the source of the message has an incentive to trigger the conflict or when the malicious messages is accompanied by truthful message.  	Rostislav Stanek, Ondrej Krcal
d2_s02_rg	d2_s02_rg	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room G	Games & Coordination	AYSE GUL	MERMER	7f0821	University of Amsterdam, CREED	Can Communication Mitigate Strategic Delays in Innovation Adoption?	Innovation is at the core of growth and welfare, however, evidence suggests that innovation adoption is at a slower pace than the technological progress justifies. We explore whether communication could mitigate the slow innovation adoption. We model innovation adoption as a risky investment with irreversible costs under pure informational externalities. Agents choose adoption timing, where the earliest investor bears the costs while all agents learn the investment returns. The informational externalities create free-riding incentives for agents, resulting in strategic delays in innovation adoptions. We theoretically show that introducing communication into this setting fosters earlier adoptions of innovation. In a laboratory experiment, we test our predictions and compare innovation adoption decisions with and without communication when there are 2 and 4 subjects in groups. In pairs, around half of the time communication does not take place and subjects coordinate on the asymmetric equilibrium of early pioneers and their followers, while in the rest communication takes place and subjects coordinate on earlier adoption times. In groups of 4, communication helps subjects to coordinate and reduce strategic delay significantly in the first half of the experiment, while coordination failures emerge in the second half of the experiment when subjects get more experienced, sweeping away the beneficial effect of communication at the aggregate level.	Ayse Gul Mermer, Sander Onderstal, Joep Sonnemans
d2_s02_rg	d2_s02_rg	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:31	Room G	Games & Coordination	ANDIS	SOFIANOS	dfbf84	University of Heidelberg	Intelligence Disclosure and Cooperation in Repeated Interactions	We investigate in a laboratory setting whether revealing information on intelligence affects behavior in games with repeated interactions. In our experimental design we communicate information on the cognitive ability of both players. We use three stage games: Prisoners' Dilemma (PD) and two versions of Battle of Sexes (BoS), with high and low payoff inequality. We find that the information affects strategic behavior significantly in two distinct ways.   In PD, disclosure markedly hampers cooperation, as higher intelligence players are less cooperative once they are made aware that they play against someone of lower ability than themselves in the disclosure treatment. Similarly, in BoS with low payoff inequality, disclosure disrupts coordination on outcomes with positive payoffs, as higher intelligence players try to force their most preferred outcome onto the less intelligent.   However, in BoS with high payoff inequality, this pattern of behavior dramatically changes. Disclosure does not significantly affect coordination rates. Differently from the low payoff inequality game,  coordination is achieved more often on outcomes that favor less intelligent players. We conjecture that when coordination becomes more difficult, because of the high inequality between payoffs, intelligence and inequality together form a coordination device.	Marco Lambrecht; Eugenio Proto;  Aldo Rustichini; Andis Sofianos
d2_s02_rg	d2_s02_rg	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:32	Room G	Games & Coordination	ANTONIO	PENTA	47c359	Universitat Pompeu Fabra	Coordination and Sophistication	How coordination can be achieved in isolated, one-shot interactions is a long-standing question in game theory. Without communication and in the absence of focal points, whether coordination can be reached at all is unclear. We show, however, that in a non-equilibrium model in which the level of reasoning responds to incentives, high stakes may induce coordination when the cognitive sophistication of the players is heterogeneous and when this is agreed upon. The equilibrium on which coordination is expected to occur, according to our model, depends on the payoff structure of the game in ways that differ from those implicit in standard solution concepts, or from the implications that one could draw applying exogenous criteria for the attribution of the strategic advantage. Our model therefore provides a novel mechanism for endogenous coordination and one in which it is differences between players, rather than their similarities, that lead to increased coordination. Using the model as a framework, we conduct an experiment to examine coordination in such a setting.	Larbi Alaoui, Katharina A. Janezic
d2_s02_rg	d2_s02_rg	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:33	Room G	Games & Coordination	RUI	SILVA	6f9975	University of East Anglia	Equilibrium selection in coordination problems	This paper proposes a criterion of equilibrium selection on coordination games based on the principles of efficiency and risk. This criterion is established on the concept of value of an equilibrium for each player, which is an a priori evaluation of that outcome based on the salience of its efficiency of risk. Efficiency is a function of an equilibrium&rsquo;s relative payoff. Risk accounts for the possibility of a deviation and the minimum payoff secured when playing an equilibrium action. An equilibrium is dominant (i.e., a focal point) if each player is most attracted to it considering its value and beliefs about how attracted is every other player. Using a small number of axioms, we find that this dominance condition is equivalent to the maximization of the players&rsquo; joint value. Utilizing data from seven previous experiments in 2 &times; 2 coordination games, we find that the value of an equilibrium is a strong predictor of the outcome in the final round, outweighing other selection criteria as a determinant of behavior.	Rui Silva
d2_s02_rg	d2_s02_rg	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:34	Room G	Games & Coordination	TIM	CASON	4d6eb0	Purdue University	Correlated Equilibria and Forecasts based on Naïve Play in Hawk Dove Games	In most games, for equilibrium to result, players need to forecast the equilibrium and choose consistent strategies. We elicit forecasts of outcomes in a series of hawk-dove (aka chicken) games played by other subjects (players). We ask whether these forecasts are consistent with any correlated equilibrium of a class of the games that allow for the possibility of types with non-standard preferences. Indeed, on simple distribution decisions a majority of players make &ldquo;fair&rdquo; choices that sacrifice some of their monetary payoff to benefit another anonymous player, and believe that others also have this preference. Surprisingly, even though players are anonymous and randomly matched, forecasters believe that the players' actions are correlated. However, forecasts are not consistent with any correlated equilibrium.	Tim Cason, Tridib Sharma, Radovan Vadovic
d2_s02_ri	d2_s02_ri	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences III	BOON HAN	KOH	c64748	University of East Anglia	(Anticipated) Discrimination against Sexual Minorities in Prosocial Domains	We study the effects of anticipated discrimination in prosocial domains against sexual minorities using a sharing (dictator) game in an online experiment. Recipients are given the opportunity to signal their sexual identity. Decision-makers, upon observing these signals, decide how much of their endowment to share with their matched recipients. We find that female, but not male, recipients are less likely to signal their sexual minority status when they are aware of the potential payoff implications of their decisions. Investigating the treatment of sexual minorities by decision-makers, we find that decision-makers are similarly generous based on the recipient&rsquo;s chosen signal of their sexual minority status. However, the intersection of decision-makers&rsquo; political affiliations and the perceptions of these signals matter: Republican heterosexual decision-makers are less generous to others whom they perceive to be sexual minorities, while their Democratic counterparts are slightly more generous. This cannot be explained by religious affiliation or perceptions about the recipient&rsquo;s political leaning, but it is consistent with the direction of their implicit bias against homosexuals.	Billur Aksoy, Ian Chadd, Boon Han Koh
d2_s02_ri	d2_s02_ri	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences III	FORTUNA	CASORIA	de25c9	Burgundy School of Business	Social preferences and  the transmission of narratives	Recently, several economists have emphasized the important role of narratives in shaping agents&rsquo; beliefs and behaviors (e.g., Akerlof and Shiller, 2015; Shiller, 2017; Eliaz and Spiegler, 2019; B&eacute;nabou et al., 2020). In particular, the theoretical analysis of B&eacute;nabou et al. (2020) focuses on how narratives are transmitted in society and can easily become viral, thus generating, depending on their nature, a chain of moral or immoral behaviors. The aim of this study is to identify experimentally: 1) which types of narratives individuals produce to justify their own selfish or pro-social behavior; 2) which narratives (exculpatory or responsibilizing) are transmitted - or not - to future decision-makers by storytellers; 3) to what extent the transmission of narratives is affected by storytellers&rsquo; social preferences and by the alignment of their and future decision-makers&rsquo; interests; 4) to what extent future decision-makers are influenced by the narratives they receive.	Fortuna Casoria and Marie Claire Villeval
d2_s02_ri	d2_s02_ri	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences III	RAFAEL	TEIXEIRA	c82287	University of Amsterdam	Paying to Take: Framing Effects, Crowding-Out and Crowding-In of Prosocial Motivation in a Dictator	We investigate the crowding-out of prosocial motivation by implementing different monetary penalties in a dictator game. Subjects have to take money from their opponent in multiple rounds with and without the monetary penalty. In some groups, the penalty reflects a fine, and a small monetary amount is deducted after the subject takes money. In the other groups, the penalty reflects a fee, and the money is deducted to allow the subject to take money. In general, the participants in the fine condition kept taking similar amounts of money, while the fee led to a significant reduction. However, this aggregate behavior reflects two countervailing factors: Those who kept taking money after the implementation of the penalty increased the amount taken (controlling for income effects) -evidence of a crowding-out effect- while those who stop taking money drastically reduced the amount taken, more than it is expected given a small fixed cost -evidence of a crowding-in effect. Social norms are not able to explain the behavioral changes but can be used to differentiate the different groups.	Rafael Teixeira
d2_s02_ri	d2_s02_ri	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences III	HAMIDEH	MOHTASHAMI BORZADARAN	057c9b	University of Birmingham	Social distance and delegation: altruism or expected reciprocity?	Previous research has demonstrated that individuals are willing to delegate tasks to shift the blame and avoid taking direct responsibility for selfish behaviour. In this paper, we conduct two studies to examine experimentally whether delegation is a function of social distance and disentangle which behavioural motives drive decision-making. Our main framework is a principal-agent game in which principals can either decide themselves how much money to share with a recipient or can hire agents who make non-binding sharing decisions on their behalf.   In Study 1, using a between-subject design, our main treatments vary social distance by either pairing principals with their friends (F-F treatment) or with a stranger (S-S treatment). Our findings provide new evidence that decreasing social distance makes principals more pro-social and less likely to delegate, ceteris paribus. Conditional on hiring agents, principals are also more likely to select the pro-social agent when the recipient is a friend.   Motivated by our findings from Study 1, we conduct a follow-up experiment exploring which pro-social motives that may drive principals&rsquo; delegation decisions. Our focus is on the role of altruistic motives and the expectation of future reciprocal favours. Using a within-subject design, we run four treatments where we vary the level of anonymity and social distance between principals and recipients. Specifically, in one dimension, we have principals paired with either a stranger or their friend and in another dimension, we either reveal or do not reveal the principals&rsquo; relationship with the recipients. To observe the role of directed altruism we compare principals&rsquo; decisions when they are paired with their friends relative to their decisions when they are paired with a stranger in the treatments where the relationship between principals and recipients is not revealed. To observe the role of expected reciprocity, we focus on treatments where principals are paired with their friends and compare their decisions across treatments varying whether the relationship between principals and recipients is revealed to the recipient or not. Our results indicate that ceteris paribus directed altruism drives the lower likelihood of principals&rsquo; choosing to delegate when social distance is reduced. Expected reciprocity does not appear to play a role in principals&rsquo; decisions to delegate or not. However, it determines the principals&rsquo; choice whether to delegate a more selfish or pro-social agent. In particular, principals who expect reciprocal favours from recipients select a more pro-social agent, conditional on their decision to delegate. 	Michalis Drouvelis, Hamideh Mohtashami Borzadaran
d2_s02_ri	d2_s02_ri	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room I	Other-regarding Preferences III	STEFANIA	BORTOLOTTI	9d49ba	UNIVERSITY OF BOLOGNA	Betrayal, Risk, and Externalities: An Experimental Study on Fairness Ideals	Trust and social risk-taking are fundamental components of the economic life and can play a role in shaping the distribution of income in the society. We experimentally study how fairness views are affected depending on whether inequality is caused by natural or social risk. We let third parties redistribute between two stakeholders whose (mis-)fortune can be due to either natural or social risk. The introduction of a social component significantly shifts third parties fairness views and uncovers the existence of a new type which is inclined to insure those stakeholders who trusted and were betrayed by another person, rather than nature.	Stefania Bortolotti, Felix Kölle, Ivan Soraperra, and Matthias Sutter
d2_s02_rl	d2_s02_rl	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room L	Gender & Labor Markets	LORY	BARILE	761522	Warwick University	Does priming close the gender competition gap?	A substantial body of literature has shown that women shy away from competition against men, which has been put forward as an explanation for the significant gender differences observed in career promotions and salary negotiations. It is therefore of crucial importance to understand the conditions under which the gender gap in competitiveness can be reduced. In this study, we explore the role of priming. Previous studies have demonstrated that primes may affect individuals&rsquo; choices; however, little is known about the causal impact of priming competition on tournament entry. Our findings replicate previous work showing that, in the absence of primes, women compete less than men. By contrast, introducing a priming task can significantly eliminate gender disparities in competitiveness. This suggests that costless and simple tools such as priming can be adopted by organisations which aim to reduce inequalities between men and women in the workplace.	Dr Lory Barile and Professor Michalis Drouvelis
d2_s02_rl	d2_s02_rl	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room L	Gender & Labor Markets	MARIA	CUBEL	93501e	UNIVERSITY OF BATH	Gender differences in the willingness to compete against a standard	There is extensive evidence showing that women shy away from competition against others and that men compete too much (Niederle and Vesterlund, 2017). In many instances, however, individuals perform against a standard of excellence set by others. They must satisfy that standard in order to obtain increased rewards. In this paper, we explore the existence of gender differences in competition against a standard by means of a laboratory experiment. Participants answer two rounds of a multiple-choice test on basic economic principles. After the first round, they are given feedback on whether they have surpassed the top quartile performance threshold set by a reference group. Before answering a second multiple-choice test they must choose their payment scheme in that round. They can choose between a piece rate per correct answer, or a scheme where the piece rate is quadrupled if their performance is above the top quartile threshold set by the reference group and zero otherwise. In addition to a control treatment with no feedback, we implement three treatments with feedback but where the standard is different: the actual top quartile performance of a previous group of peers, the top quartile performance expected by peers and the one expected by a group of professors in economics from the same university as the participants. We find that women are less prone to compete against the standard in the absence of feedback. The gap closes when feedback is provided, and the standard is set by peers but widens again if the standard is set by experts. Our results are useful to understand gender differences in self-promotion and how feedback could be employed to reduce these gender differences. JEL Classification: C91, D91, J16 Keywords: gender, competitive behaviour, experiment, information provision	Maria Cubel, Santiago Sanchez-Pages, Christiane Schwieren and Cosima-Valerie Steck
d2_s02_rl	d2_s02_rl	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room L	Gender & Labor Markets	ZAHRA	MURAD	7bc987	University of Portsmouth	The signals we give: Performance feedback, gender, and competition	Extended Abstract: Feedback provision is a powerful tool that organizations have available to improve worker performance,  spark individual growth and influence career development. Despite its importance, managers have often been found to avoid providing feedback to their workers. Evidence also suggests that women tend to receive vaguer feedback than men (Correll and Simard, 2016).   We use a stylized online experiment to causally examine how managers provide feedback to workers, whether its provision differs based on the worker&rsquo;s gender, and how feedback impacts the gender competition gap. Workers are asked to choose whether they would like to enter a tournament, and managers are given the opportunity to provide performance feedback to them. Specifically, managers see a noisy signal about their worker&rsquo;s performance and choose whether to convey: (1) exactly the signal they received, or (2) a vaguer signal. Depending on the treatment assignment, workers either receive the manager&rsquo;s feedback after making their competition choice (thus rendering the information non-instrumental), or they receive the feedback before making their competition choice (hence, feedback is instrumental to them).  Overall, managers withhold a substantial amount of information, even when feedback is positive. Hence, a significant proportion of managers withhold praise. Moreover, when feedback is non-instrumental, women are more likely than men to receive vague feedback when they perform poorly. This suggests that, in environments where feedback is not (immediately) instrumental, women may be at an informational disadvantage, in that they are not given the information they need for improving their decisions in the future. Finally, we do not observe gender differences in feedback provision when feedback is instrumental. Nonetheless, the gender competition gap increases after feedback. This is driven by gender differences in how men and women respond to negative feedback. Specifically, men are more likely to ignore negative instrumental feedback than women. 	Alexander Coutts and Boon Han Koh
d2_s02_rl	d2_s02_rl	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room L	Gender & Labor Markets	DAVID	HUBER	6becef	Karlsruhe Institute of Technology	Setting Adequate Wages for Workers:  Managers' work experience, incentive scheme and gender matter	Many societies report an increasingly divergent development of managers&rsquo; salaries compared to that of their workforce. Moreover, there is often a lack in diversity amongst managerial boards. We investigate the role of managers&rsquo; gender and incentive scheme on wages chosen for workers by conducting two experimental studies. The data reveal male managers respond in more self-oriented ways to their incentive scheme. Further, we find that experience with the workers' task can increase appreciation of workers. Effects are strongest when the managers&rsquo; compensation scheme rules out self-orientation. Overall, female managers display more consistency in choosing adequate wages for workers, i.e. their choices are less affected by incentives. An increase in diversity may thus help reducing salary disparities and foster work atmosphere.	Leonie Kühl, Nora Szech, David Huber
d2_s02_rl	d2_s02_rl	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room L	Gender & Labor Markets	MATTEO	MIGHELI	41813c	University of Torino	Investigating gender bias in evaluations for job promotion: does homophily play a role? Results from a survey experiment in Italy	The existence of gender bias in hiring and job promotions is a major issue affecting gender equality. We conduct an online experiment to investigate the role of gender stereotypes and homophily in producing gender discrimination in career advancement. The experiment involved about 500 people with medium- and high-level jobs. They were requested to evaluate the CVs of three candidates for a promotion and to choose who has to be promoted. The experiment was designed in order to avoid social desirability bias typical of experiments that implicate fictitious situations and in fact participants faced alternatively three female candidates, three male candidates and a female and two male candidates. The results suggest that men do not favor men in mixed-gender evaluation, probably because they do not want to appear as male chauvinists.  However, in mono-gender evaluations, their choices reveal a preference for a &laquo;male trait&raquo; (i.e. leadership capacity) when they have to choose among three female candidates. On the contrary, women tend to favour the female candidate in mixed-gender evaluations, whereas neither their choices nor their numerical assessments are affected in mono-gender evaluations. The existence of a homophilic bias shows the importance of gender-balanced evaluation boards and managers&rsquo; training on conscious and unconscious gender bias.	Renzo Carriero, Marianna A. Filandri, Matteo Migheli and Silvia B. Pasqua
d2_s02_rq	d2_s02_rq	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room Q	Voting	ALICE	HALLMAN	272c87	Uppsala University, department of economics	CANCELED: Sequential voting with costly information	Sequential voting is used in a wide variety of settings; legal, political, expert committees, and social decision making. This paper is the first to explain why late voters sometimes follow the first voter, commonly known as herding, and sometimes get to cast the deciding vote within the same framework. I extend the standard sequential voting model with a cost of information and show how the information environment uniquely determines the voting and information aggregation outcome. Equilibrium is characterized by the existence of 'Devil's advocates,' players who support an opposite argument to make people think seriously, in information environments where the cost of information and/or the signal precision is high. On the other hand, bandwagons occur where the cost of information is low and/or the signal precision is low. I also show that this mechanism performs better than a simultaneous voting mechanism in all information environments by improving information aggregation in high-cost-high-quality information environments and lowering the cost of information aggregation in low-cost-low-quality information environments. Further, it often performs as well as can a social planner that is not constrained by individual incentive compatibility. Finally, it provides recommendations on welfare-maximizing seniority rules in each information environment.  This model gives unique predictions for myopic and strategic voters in each information environment, and the behavior of strategic players is independent of the existence of altruistic player. It is hence well suited for testing wether subjects in the lab can backward induce.	Alice Hallman
d2_s02_rq	d2_s02_rq	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room Q	Voting	ANIOL	LLORENTE-SAGUER	68d459	Queen Mary Unviersity of London	Weighting Votes	Committees typically decide through voting. One of the challenges of the voting mechanism is to aggregate information when committee members have different quality of information. In such an environment, more complex rules allow voters to better aggregate information by endogenously allocating more decision power to members with better information. We consider two polar examples of voting rules in terms of complexity: majority voting and continuous voting. Under majority, members can simply vote in favour of the proposal, against it or they can abstain. Due to its coarseness, this system does not allow voters to properly express the quality of their information: it either ignores information of poorly informed or it attaches the same weight to votes form highly informed. Under continuous voting, instead, voters have incentives to choose the optimal weights that implements the efficient decision for any information structure. The desirable properties of this additional flexibility might be overturned by the cognitive costs to deal with the additional complexity. We test this using laboratory experiments, in which subjects vote with the two rules under different environments. We also study participants&rsquo; preferences over the mechanism used. Our main experimental results are the following. First, continuous voting does better than majority voting on average, but this difference is not significant and it is significantly lower than theoretically predicted. Second, under continuous voting, voters with intermediate information quality attach too much weight on their votes. Third, communication makes these differences disappear. And fourth, despite the higher average welfare under continuous voting, participants are equally split in their support for it.	Laurent Bouton, Aniol Llorente-Saguer, Anonin Mace, Dimitrios Xetferis
d2_s02_rq	d2_s02_rq	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room Q	Voting	NATALIA	JIMENEZ JIMENEZ	13ae1f	Universidad Pablo de Olavide & Middlesex University London	The effect of tax avoidance in voting decisions: a real-effort task experiment	The annual report of the Tax Justice Network (2020) reveals that countries are losing over $427 billion each year to tax avoidance and tax evasion. In this paper, we analyze theoretically and experimentally the effect of tax avoidance on voting decisions and work productivity when we vary both the cost and the information about tax avoidance. We propose a basic model of redistributive politics in which there are two types of voters (high and low skilled workers) and two exogenous tax schemes to vote for. We design a laboratory experiment to test the results of the model, i.e. the tax rate chosen by majority voting. We consider a control treatment where tax avoidance is not feasible. In the main treatments, only the high skilled workers are allowed to avoid taxes with a fixed cost that varies in two different treatments. We also consider two additional treatments with full or partial information about tax avoidance decisions by high skilled workers. Overall, the preliminary experimental results support our theoretical predictions.	Natalia Jiménez Jiménez, Elena Molis-Bañales and  Angel Solano-García
d2_s02_rq	d2_s02_rq	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room Q	Voting	AHRASH	DIANAT	bdfdda	University of Essex	Simple Voting	We conduct a laboratory experiment to investigate the performance of a class of run-off voting rules.  To do so, we use a notion of &ldquo;strategic simplicity&rdquo; introduced by Borgers and Li (2021) to characterize voting mechanisms by the level of higher-order beliefs that agents need to form in order to determine their optimal strategies.   Our between-subject experimental design varies the simplicity of the voting rules while keeping the number of players and the number of alternatives fixed.  Our results can help shed light on the persistence of majority voting in real-world settings, despite its theoretical weaknesses.	Ahrash Dianat and Mikhail Freer
d2_s02_rq	d2_s02_rq	2 Sep 2022	11:00 - 12:30	Room Q	Voting	ROMAN-GABRIEL	OLAR	254e03	Dublin City University	Voting for democracy? Examining the effect of political candidates’ autocratic past on voter preferences	When do voters choose candidates that were part of an autocratic regime? How does their autocratic past influence voters&rsquo; choices and perception? While there is a vast literature on the effects of candidates&rsquo; background on voters&rsquo; choices and preferences, there has been very little attention paid to these factors in new democracies. This lack of evidence has important implications for our understanding of the role that elites and citizens play in democratic consolidation and survival. Against this background, this pre-analysis develops and aims to test novel theoretical propositions on the effect of political candidates&rsquo; autocratic background on voters&rsquo; choices and preferences. Using a forced-choice conjoint experiment to be run in countries that have recently democratized (Armenia, Tunisia, Ukraine and Moldova), this project aims to examine how candidates&rsquo; autocratic past affects voters perception of candidates&rsquo; commitment to democracy, suitability for office and likelihood of voting. Also, it aims to unpack how voters&rsquo; own commitment to democracy shapes their choices and perceptions of the candidates.	Roman-Gabriel Olar
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	THOMAS	DE HAAN	a9ee10	University of Bergen (UiB)	Product ratings and externalities	In this project, we investigate how information regarding production externalities (e.g. ecolabels) can be presented to create market pressure on firms to reduce them. Specifically and novelly, we ask whether integrating information on externalities and consumer product ratings into one rating, can result in firms feeling pressure to reduce externalities from all consumers, not just &lsquo;green/activist&rsquo; consumers. We address this question theoretically and report results from an incentivized laboratory market experiment.	Thomas de Haan, Magnus Våge Knutsen
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	JAVIER	RODERO	fbc473	University of Malaga	Leniency degree and cartel (in)stability in the lab	We develop a dynamic experiment derived from the centipede game where subjects in pairs have to decide sequentially whether to stay competitive or start a very profitable collusive agreement. Once cartels have been started,  they can de dismantled through a random investigation of a exogenous Competition Authority or through Leniency seeking by any of the colliders. We also allow subjects to communicate their intentions of continuing colluding using closed-form messages. In our design we consider two dimensions: i) The Leniency degree for the whistleblower and ii) whereas messages increases the chance of investigation. Our results indicate that messages are used less frequently when costly but that do not decrease significantly cartel formation and that a greater Leniency degree have negative effects in terms of market efficiency.	Adriana Alventosa,  Javier Rodero Cosano, José Manuel Ordóñez de Haro
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	RADOSVETA	IVANOVA-STENZEL	9a7b69	Technische Universität Berlin	Cournot meets Bayes-Nash: A discontinuity in behavior in finitely repeated duopoly games	We conduct a series of Cournot duopoly market experiments with a high number of repetitions and fixed matching. Our treatments include markets with (i) complete cost symmetry and complete information, (ii) slight cost asymmetry and complete information, and (c) varying cost asymmetries and incomplete information. For the case of complete cost symmetry and complete information, our data confirm the well-known result that duopoly players achieve, on average, partial collusion. However, as soon as any level of cost asymmetry or incomplete information is introduced, observed average individual quantities are remarkably close to the static Bayes-Nash equilibrium predictions.	Cédric Argenton, Radosveta Ivanova-Stenzel, Wieland Müller
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	LISA	BRUTTEL	266303	University of Potsdam	Sanctioning the choice to communicate precisely hits cartels	Experimental studies on firm behavior often use the mere decision to communicate as a measure for cartel formation. This is a strong simplification of the legal practice that relies on the communication content and prices to define a cartel. We test whether the experimental simplification is reasonable. Using machine learning techniques to cluster the communication content into cartel talk and other communication, we find that firms' price setting behavior in the experiment is mainly driven by the mutual decision to communicate but only little by the content of communication. Thus, our results justify the use of the communication decision as a proxy for the formation of a cartel.	Maximilian Andres, Lisa Bruttel
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	ANTONIO J	MORALES	7837a3	University of Malaga	Market entry, rent seeking and forward induction. An experiment	We consider a two-player two-stage model in which players first choose whether to engage in a productive (under price competition) or unproductive (rent-seeking) activity, where the rents in the contest game are a fraction of the market profits. Subgame perfection predicts that (i) rent-seeking activities increase with the size of the rents and (ii) earnings are equalized between both economic activities. The experimental data supports the directional predictions but not the level predictions: rent-seeking activities are pursued less than predicted and prices are higher than competitive pricing. Forward induction arguments provide accurate level predictions. Earnings are equalized across economic activities and firms manage to develop coopetitive strategies that allow them to extract a large proportion of the economic surplus.	Antonio J Morales; Javier Rodero Cosano
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	DANIEL	PARRA	ed3c6b	WZB Berlin Social Science Center	Impact of lying aversion and prosociality on cheating	When individuals decide whether or not to lie, they compare the monetary benefits with the psychological cost of violating their norms. In addition, they are more likely to lie when their lies benefit others. This paper compares the impact of the aversion to lying and prosociality on cheating. I first present a model that incorporates heterogeneous lying costs and prosociality as a part of individuals' preferences. I show that individuals are mostly honest when someone else has lied on their behalf. At the same time, if lying generates a positive externality, individuals lie more due to prosocial motives. I test these predictions in two online experiments and show that participants are more dishonest when their lies benefit others. More importantly, I present evidence that, on average, the prosocial motive is stronger than the lying aversion motive. Further results show that individuals care about their influence on others' outcomes rather than taking actions that signal a prosocial intention but do not impact others' outcomes.	Daniel Parra
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	FRANZISKA	HEINICKE	0220c4	University of Mannheim	The Effect of Chosen or Given Luck on Honesty	Does being lucky (or unlucky) affect honest decision-making? We examine (1) whether luck-based income strengthens or erodes the moral value of honesty; (2) whether the perceived level of agency over an uncertain event affects the relationship between luck and honesty; and (3) whether accumulated luck affects honesty. To this end, we conducted a lab experiment in which participants self-reported a dice roll outcome, which was associated with effort-based income, after receiving luck-based income. We manipulated the participants' perceptions regarding their influence on luck-based income. In the exogenous luck treatment, computerized coin tosses determined luck-based income, whereas in the endogenous luck treatment, the participants chose the coin's winning side before the computerized coin toss. Our results, contradicting our hypotheses, are as follows: (1) lying behavior increases when contemporaneous luck-based income is high, (2) lying is not affected by the perceived level of agency, and (3) lying is not affected by the previous outcomes of luck-based income. Our observations challenge the view that dishonest behavior is driven by contexts that may render moral justification. Therefore, our findings indicate that differences in dishonest behavior may be largely due to individual-specific heterogeneity.	Diogo Geraldes, Franziska Heinicke, Duk Gyoo Kim
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	LUDOVICA	ORLANDI	7159c9	Nottingham Trent University	Risk taking with externalities	Few studies have assessed the relationship between individuals&rsquo; risk attitudes and vaccination intentions. The decision to vaccinate, however, requires individuals to weigh the risk of developing vaccine-adverse side-effects against the benefit for others that follows from the decrease in spread of the disease when most people are vaccinated. Thus, examining how the willingness to help others can moderate risk aversion steaming from the possibility of negative consequences to oneself, seems crucial to develop a comprehensive understanding of willingness to vaccinate. In this paper we develop a novel experiment that allows us to investigate the interrelation between individuals&rsquo; risk attitudes and social preferences, and the impact on individuals&rsquo; decision to receive a vaccine. We implement a risk elicitation task where there is a passive player and subjects are asked to choose between a certain payment and a gamble that has both a positive and the negative outcome. Each subject&rsquo;s decision to take risk generates a positive outcome for the passive player.  The results show that subjects are more willing to take risks, despite the potential loss for themselves, when their risk-taking benefit others.  We find that framing the risk-taking task as a vaccination decision significantly increases participants&rsquo; willingness to take risks compared to the unframed treatment, suggesting the existence of a strong social norm. However, the effect of the vaccine frame appears to be stronger among those already vaccinated, indicating that there are limits to the potential use of this norm to increase vaccination rates.	Theodoros Alysandratos, Thorsten Chmura and Ludovica Orlandi
d2_s04_ra	d2_s04_ra	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room A	Lightning VII	FELIX	KÖLLE	e8a956	University of Cologne	On the Persistence of Dishonesty	In social and economic interactions, individuals often exploit informational asymmetries and behave dishonestly to pursue private ends. Many of these situations involve costs and beneﬁts that accrue over time. In this paper, we experimentally investigate the role of time on dishonesty. We ﬁnd that neither delaying the gains from cheating, nor increasing the engagement with one&rsquo;s own unethical behavior reduces the likelihood of cheating. At the same time, allowing for a delay between the time when private information is obtained and when it is reported does not aﬀect cheating in our experiment.	Stefania Bortolotti, Felix Kölle, Lukas Wenner
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	DIRK	ENGELMANN	ec98d3	Humboldt University Berlin	Decomposing Trust	Trust is an important driver of economic growth and other economic outcomes. Previous studies suggest that the decision to trust is driven by a combination of risk attitudes, distributional preferences, betrayal aversion, and beliefs about the probability of being reciprocated. We compare the results of a binary trust game to the results of a series of control treatments that by design remove the effect of one or more of these components of trust. This allows us to decompose variation in trust behavior into its underlying factors. Our results imply that beliefs are the main driver of trust, and that the additional components only play a role when beliefs about reciprocity are sufficiently optimistic. Our decomposition approach can be applied to other settings where multiple factors that are not mutually independent affect behavior. We discuss its advantages over the more traditional approach of controlling for measures of relevant factors derived from separate tasks in regressions, in particular with respect to measurement error and omitted variable bias.	Dirk Engelmann, Jana Friedrichsen, Roel van Veldhuizen, Pauline Vorjohann, Joachim Winter
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	GUILLERMO	MATEU	7a98e5	LESSAC	Redistribute enough or don’t redistribute at all: how effectively can public policies reduce destruction (envy)? A cross cultural experiment	Envy-related feelings and behaviours can either stimulate or impede economic development. In this paper we focus on negative envy as an underlying mechanism which motivates individuals to engage in a destruction behaviour, and we argue that redistribution policies can contribute to reduce envy-related behaviours. We perform an experiment in France, Costa-Rica, Russia and Romania in which we place individuals in an unequal endowment situation, and offer them the possibility to undertake negative envious actions. We also introduce the possibility of a strong or weak redistribution policy and look at the percentage of people undertaking the envious action. Results show that while weak redistribution policies have a counter-productive effect, compared to no policy at all, strong redistribution policies reach the desirable effect by reducing destructive behaviours among participants. The results are homogeneous among countries.	Guillermo Mateu, Tatiana Babkina, Dana Bondoc, Gilles Grolleau, Mikhail Myagkov, Roger Muñoz, Bertrand Verheyden, Angela Sutan
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	VERONICA	PIZZIOL	c7ac94	Scuola IMT Alti Studi Lucca	Cooperation is unaffected  by the threat of severe adverse events in large Public Goods Games	We study how cooperation in a large one-shot Public Goods Game (groups of 40 members) is affected by the presence of a slight chance (2.5%) of severe adverse events (loss equal to 67% of the endowment and 100% of the maximum gain from the public good). We find that cooperation is substantial (mean contributions around 59%), notwithstanding a marginal return of contributions as low as 0.05. The cooperation level is comparable to what is found in similar settings for groups of 4 members. Furthermore, we find no appreciable effect of the threat of severe adverse events, whether their realization is independent across individuals, perfectly positively or negatively correlated. We conclude that cooperation in a large Public Goods Game is unlikely to be affected by rare adverse events, independently of how risk is correlated across individuals.	Chiara Nardi, Veronica Pizziol, Ivan Soraperra
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	LEON	HOUF	c4e84c	Heidelberg University	Going beyond the in-/out-group dichotomy: Investigating altruism towards middle-groups	In-group favouritism and out-group hostility are well-known phenomena in research, which are repeatedly documented across fields, contexts and methods. But the world around us does not always fit into this dichotomy of in- and out-group. Often there is a "middle-group" that shares some identity characteristics with the in-group, but ultimately neither belongs to the in-group, nor is an alien out-group. This setting raises the question how altruistic actions towards a middle-group compare to actions in favour of an in-group or against an out-group.  Using an online laboratory experiment, we investigate altruistic actions in an allocation task with the minimal group paradigm. Through a between-subject design we causally identify the change in altruistic actions when a middle group is introduced into the two-group setting of in- and out-group. Furthermore, we vary the identity characteristics of the middle-group which allows us to measure the impact of characteristics and arrange the types of middle-groups on a scale. With this paper we extend the current research on in- and out-groups conceptually and our results help to model dynamics behind altruistic actions towards different groups, for example refugee groups with diverse backgrounds. 	Leon Houf, Christiane Schwieren
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	IVAN	SORAPERRA	502027	University of Amsterdam	Willful Ignorance: A Meta Analytic Review	People sometimes avoid information about the impact of their action as an excuse to be selfish. Such &ldquo;willful ignorance&rdquo; reduces prosocial behaviors and has detrimental effects in many consumer and organizational contexts. We report the first meta-analysis on willful ignorance, testing the robustness of the phenomenon and quantifying its underlying motives. We analyze 33,603 decisions made by 6,531 participants in 56 different treatment effects all implying variations of an experimental paradigm assessing willful ignorance behaviorally. Meta-analytic results reveal the ability to avoid information about the impact of ones&rsquo; actions decreases prosocial behaviors by 28%, even if participants can easily find out this information. We estimate that about 40% of the observed ignorance is committed by reluctant altruists who use ignorance to excuse selfishness. We investigate the boundary conditions of willful ignorance and address the theoretical, methodological, and practical implications of our findings on who engages in willful ignorance, as well as when, and why.	Linh Vu, Ivan Soraperra, Margarita Leib, Joël van der Weele, and Shaul Shalvi
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	RAINER MICHAEL	RILKE	c08c07	WHU - Otto Beisheim School of Management	Motivating Underperformers with Input-based Relative Performance Feedback: Evidence from a Field Experiment	A common challenge for firms is delivering performance feedback so that underperforming employees get back on track. We use a field experiment to test whether this can be achieved by providing relative performance feedback based on inputs, which is relative performance feedback that is strongly linked to differences in effort exertion and less affected by differences in experienced luck and ability. Consequently, input-based relative performance feedback provides underperforming employees with more concrete guidance on how to improve and fewer feelings of not being in control. Our findings support our predictions by showing that input- based relative performance feedback increases input-based performance among low performers. We also find preliminary evidence that it eventually increases underperformers&rsquo; contributions to the firm&rsquo;s outputs. Our results are consistent with input-based relative performance feed- back facilitating the upward social comparison process for underperforming employees. Our findings have implications for firms that face employee turnover restrictions or otherwise seek to motivate low performers in their workforce.	Rainer Michael Rilke, Victor van Pelt, Sebastian Lehnen, Christina Guenther
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	BERENIKA	TUZILOVA	23e6cd	University of Economics, Prague	Enhancing tax compliance by increasing information salience: Natural field experiment	The paper presents results from a randomized field experiment administered in cooperation with the Financial Administration of the Slovak Republic (FASR) aiming to increase tax collections of Capital Gains Tax on property (further just &ldquo;Tax&rdquo;). The intervention is based on sending informative letters to more than 14 thousand of potential evaders. Sending reminder letters had a significant effect on the tax compliance and increased the number of taxpayers who declared the Tax by 26.6 pp and brought FASR additional 2.5 mil. Eur. To see whether the content of a letter matters, we tested four variations of the letter on top of a baseline letter - two types of deterrence messages, two moral messages, each interacted with an additional leaflet - but none of them significantly increased the tax compliance compared to the baseline letter. Additional informative leaflet with visual guidelines decreased the response rate of those in standard reporting period and had no effect on those taxpayers in expired reporting periods. 	Dagmara Celik-Katreniak, Lubomír Cingl, Richard Priesol, Petra Rybošová, Berenika Tužilová
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	JIRI	SPALEK	3b96f1	Masaryk University	Anchoring Effects on Charitable Donation: A Field study.	The study focuses on the anchoring effect and its impact on willingness to contribute to the public good. Specifically, it compares the effects on the two types of donors - regular and one-off donors.  The results, which are based on a field experiment with M&eacute;decins Sans Fronti&egrave;res donors, are in line with the available literature (Doob &amp; McLaughlin, 1987, Schibrowsky &amp; Peltier, 1995, De Bruyn &amp; Prokopec, 2013, Desmet, 1999) in terms of the effect of amounts on willingness to donate.   However, the groups tested (regular and irregular donors) show different behaviors. The results confirm the intuitive assumption, also discussed by De Bruyn &amp; Prokopec (2013), that rare donors will be affected by the anchoring effect to a greater extent, as regular donors know better their "ideal amount" they are willing to donate.	Lubos Turis, Jiri Spalek
d2_s04_rb	d2_s04_rb	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room B	Lightning VIII	CORNELIA	STRAUSS	97a5a6	University of Giessen	Monetary Policy, Fairness Preferences and Unemployment: Experimental Evidence	A frequently addressed, yet prevailing puzzle in macroeconomics is why wages do not fall sufficiently in recessions to avert surges in unemployment. This study addresses a hypothetical causal chain from nominal wages and reciprocal labor relations to unemployment. To test this hypothesis, we implemented a laboratory experiment of a stylized economy with fiat money. Money serves the same three roles it does in real life, namely it is a medium of exchange, a unit of account and a - temporary - store of value. The results suggest that fiat money acquires value endogenously. In the course of the experiment a strong reciprocal relationship develops in which sellers respond with high effort to high nominal wages. After an exogenous economy-wide reduction of the money supply wages remained sticky. In contrast to our expectations, however, the employment rate did not decrease after the monetary shock.	Cornelia Strauss
d2_s04_rc	d2_s04_rc	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room C	Public Goods IV	ENRICO MATTIA	SALONIA	069501	Toulouse School of Economics	On Redistribution Choices: Altruism, Incentives, and Beliefs	Why do people hold conflicting views on redistributive policies? This paper shows that beliefs on how people react to incentives under different redistributive institutions shape these views. If an agent believes that the participants in the economy will react significantly to the lower incentives of more redistributive systems, she will prefer less egalitarian policies. If she believes otherwise, she might prefer more redistribution. We build a simple model that sheds light on the relationship between beliefs and choices of redistributive institutions. A dictatorial decision-maker with Rawlsian preferences - who wants to maximise the material outcome of the worse-off - may optimally choose a less redistributive system when she believes that the wealthier individuals will act selfishly. This choice is because, in this case, under the weaker economic incentives provided by a more redistributive system, even the poorer individuals are worse off compared to a system with more incentives and less redistribution. If beliefs are overly pessimistic, there will be too low redistribution compared to what would emerge under complete information about preferences. We plan to conduct an experiment based on our model to assess the relevance of incentives considerations and the role of beliefs on other agents&rsquo; preferences for redistributive systems.	Michele Bisceglia, Enrico Mattia Salonia
d2_s04_rc	d2_s04_rc	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room C	Public Goods IV	MATTHIEU	POURIEUX	edcae5	CREM UMR CNRS 6211 - University Rennes 1	Is redistribution driven by politicians’ or voters’ preferences? An experimental study with French local politicians	We conduct an online redistribution experiment with 773 French local politicians to study why politicians deviate from the median voter&rsquo;s preferences. Participants had to choose a flat tax rate to be applied to groups of French citizens. One part of the total tax proceeds is lost, while the remainder is equally redistributed among the group (equality-efficiency trade-off). The choice environment differs with respect to the degree of information about the median voter and the degree of political competition. We find that politicians do take voters&rsquo; preferences into consideration, but there is also a strong impact of their own ideology while there is no effect of political competition. We also recruit a representative sample from the French population and find little behavioral differences with our politician sample.	Roberto Brunetti and Matthieu Pourieux
d2_s04_rc	d2_s04_rc	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room C	Public Goods IV	DAVID	KUSTERER	b60643	University of Cologne	Social Preferences and Rating Biases in Subjective Performance Evaluations	Abstract We study the determinants of biases in subjective performance evaluations in an MTurk experiment. In the experiment subjects in the role of workers work on a real effort task. Subjects in the role of supervisors observe subsamples of the workers&rsquo; output and assess their performance. We conduct 6 experimental treatments varying (i) whether workers&rsquo; pay depends on the performance evaluation (ii) whether supervisors are paid for the accuracy of their evaluations and (iii) the precision of the information available to supervisors. In line with a simple formal model of optimal evaluations we find that ratings are more lenient and less accurate when they determine bonus payments and that rewards for accuracy reduce leniency. When supervisors have access to more detailed performance information their ratings vary to a stronger extent with observed performance. In contrast to the model's prediction, there is a non-trivial relationship between prosocial preferences and rating leniency: While more prosocial supervisors sometimes provide more lenient ratings, they also invest more time in the rating task and tend to achieve a higher rating accuracy.	David Kusterer and Dirk Sliwka
d2_s04_rc	d2_s04_rc	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room C	Public Goods IV	LE	ZHANG	f66f9a	MGSM, Macquarie University	Group identity and promotions	How does group identity affect promotion decisions and what impact does it have on the performance of organizations through promotions? We provide answers based on two experiments in which we identify the effect of group identity on the employer&rsquo;s preferences regarding whom to promote, the employer&rsquo;s expectations of post-promotion effort of promoted and non-promoted workers, and the post-promotion effort itself. In Experiment 1  we find that group identity impacts the employer&rsquo;s preferences. The employer is more likely to promote an in-group worker when the productivities of the in-group and the out-group workers are the same but also when the in-group worker is observably less productive, the latter of which results in lower overall performance. In Experiment 2 we observe that not getting promoted decreases the effort of the out-group worker but not of the in-group worker and that the employer has correct expectations of workers&rsquo; effort in the presence of group identity. When comparing expectations and the promotion decision of individual employers, we find that many employers promote an in-group worker not only when they expect the same combined effort from promoting an in-group or out-group worker but also when they expect lower combined effort from promoting an in-group worker. This in-group bias in the promotion decision results in a significant loss of efficiency. 	Michal Ďuriník, Hodaka Morita, Maroš Servátka, Le Zhang
d2_s04_rd	d2_s04_rd	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences II	JAN S.	KRAUSE	9deec4	Kiel Institute for the World Economy	Sign effects in Quasi-Hyperbolic Discounting: Evidence from an incentivized experiment	Quasi-hyperbolic preferences are actively studied in the gain domain with two recent meta-analysis providing evidence in favor of a sizeable present bias. However, only very little is known about a possible sign effect for present biases. Even though the sign effect for discount rates is an established and often replicated phenomenon, evidence from incentivized experiments is rare. We provide evidence in favor of a sign effect both for present biases and discount rates from an incentivized experiment. In this paper we specify under which assumptions risk preferences are time preferences and provide a behavioral characterization of a reference-dependent intertemporal model of risk preferences that combines Quasi-Hyperbolic Discounting and Cumulative Prospect Theory. Furthermore, we report results from an incentivized experiment where subjects completed a comprehensive risk task  that allows for the estimation of all parameters of a CPT model and an additional comprehensive time preference task, designed to elicit present biases and discount rates in the gain and loss domain. Subjects were provided with a large participation fee four weeks prior to the experiments in which they could win or lose money. In order to minimize differences in transaction costs, all gains and losses where settled via scheduled bank transfers. We extend the structural model approach by Vieider et al. (2016) and l&rsquo;Haridon and Vieider (2019) to jointly estimate risk- and time preferences on the population and individual level. Our results show a sign effect for both discount rates and present biases. Specifically, on the population level we find a present bias for losses but not for gains. On the individual level we find that a large number of subjects have a present bias in one and a future bias in the other domain.	Jan S. Krause
d2_s04_rd	d2_s04_rd	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences II	JULIE	ROSAZ	4f666a	Bsb	Time is money! Experiments on the values of time saving	The value of time (VOT) is the monetary amount that a DM would be willing to pay to reduce a given waiting time. For instance, how much a DM is willing to pay to reduce by 10min a waiting time of 30min? The value of reliability (VOR) is the monetary amount that a DM would be willing to pay to eliminate the variability of a given risky waiting time, which is to obtain a sure waiting time equal to its expected value. For instance, how much a DM is willing to pay (reliability-prone) or receive (reliability-averse) to obtain a sure waiting time of 45min rather than a fifty-fifty risky waiting time of either 30min or 60min?  In this paper, we propose two experiments to evaluate (i) if the VOT is increasing or decreasing with the length of waiting time? (ii) if the VOR is positive or negative, i.e., is there a "pure preference" for waiting time reliability? In both experiments, subjects will bear a real waiting time before receiving their payments. During the game, they took decisions on how much to pay to save part of this time. We vary in both experiments in a between subject treatment the initial waiting time between {15; 30; 60} minutes. -&#9;In the VOT experiment, subjects receive an endowment and decide how much they want to pay for a certain reduction of the initial waiting time. We vary the reduction (1/12; 1/6; 1/4; 1/3; 1/2; 2/3; 1 of the initial waiting time) in a within subject design.  -&#9;In the VOR experiment, subjects receive an endowment and decide if they prefer a certain waiting time or a risky waiting time. Then they indicate how much they want to pay to face their preferred situation. In a within subject, we vary the risky situations (the maximum and minimum waiting times, the probabilities but keeping the expected waiting time constant). Our results have public policy implications. High (resp. low) queue length should be reduced first if the VOT is increasing (resp. decreasing). If the VOT is not constant, the VOT used in cost-benefit analysis of public transport projects reducing travel time should be different for long distance and short distance trips. If the VOR is positive, this would mean that "pure preferences" over waiting time work with scheduling constraints (i.e. being late or early at an important RDV) contributing obviously to a positive VOR. If the VOR is negative or small, this would mean that "pure preferences" over waiting time work against scheduling constraints. Therefore, improving reliability for users with no clear scheduling constraints would not be necessary. 	M. Beaud, T. Blayac, J. Rosaz and M. Stephan
d2_s04_rd	d2_s04_rd	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences II	DANIELE	CALIARI	06a702	WZB	Randomization behaviour and reliability of preference elicitation	Recent research in behavioural economics has uncovered the importance of randomization in individual decision-making. We study the effects of randomization on the measurement of preference parameters in Multiple Price Lists designs. We use a non-parametric Bayesian approach to estimate the joint distribution of preference and precision parameters. Using a representative sample of the Danish population, we document that the marginal distribution of precision is bimodal, revealing the existence of a substantial portion of individuals (30-40\%) who adopt a randomization behaviour. For these individuals, the estimates of preference parameters are not robust. We replicate our results on a representative sample of the Canadian population, both in risk and time preference, and with and without multiple switching.	Daniele Caliari and Valentino Dardanoni
d2_s04_rd	d2_s04_rd	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences II	CAVIT GÖRKEM	DESTAN	1192e3	University of Bonn	Active Participation Bias	We observe a pattern in various experiments such that when the equilibrium prediction is staying passive or choosing zero effort/bid, individuals show a positive level of activity. Although people try to explain that phenomenon with different channels in each domain, we think that there is a common mechanism, namely Active Participation Bias. Using an online experiment, we showed that people have a tendency to become active even when the payoff maximizing action is staying passive and when other factors, such as cognitive mistakes or risk aversion, are ruled out. Moreover, once participants become active (which is not optimal in the game), they play the optimal strategy in the subgame they entered by becoming active even though this strategy is not revenue-maximizing. In other words, participants seem to ignore that the subgame is part of a broader game, and they myopically focus on the task at hand. We also use additional survey data to investigate the real-life implications of the findings beyond experimental settings.	Cavit Görkem Destan, Thomas Dohmen
d2_s04_rd	d2_s04_rd	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences II	MARCO	MANTOVANI	54690a	Università degli studi di Milano-Bicocca	Moral Preferences over Taboo Trade-offs in the Time of Coronavirus	Covid-19 brought to the forefront of the political agenda the trade-off between health and economic activities. Leveraging theoretical and empirical tools from economics we estimate moral preferences over the space of possible combinations of fatalities and jobs losses due to the pandemic in Italy, the UK and the US. Health weights more than economic activity, and respondents&rsquo; stable traits influence attitudes more than their Covidrelated experiences. Policy responses look misaligned with estimated preferences. Italy adopted more stringent containment measures, while Italian respondents display a relatively weaker pro-health attitude. We stress-test this result and find it is robust: it does not stem either from a reaction to the policies adopted or from differences in fundamentals, such as labor market conditions and health costs.	Antonio Filippin, Marco Mantovani
d2_s04_rd	d2_s04_rd	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences II	MONICA	CAPRA	b4f204	Claremont Graduate University	CANCELED: Dread of future pain and current consumption	This study tests the idea that current consumption is a substitute for information about aversive future events. That is, the more we enjoy the present the less willing we are to learn about potential negative future experiences. We also test if receiving information about aversive future events decreases the demand for immediate pleasurable consumption. We run two separate laboratory experiments focused on these two different but related questions, using ice cream as the immediate consumption and the chance of mildly painful electric shocks as the aversive future event. We find that current consumption increases information avoidance, and thus increases preference for later information. Consumption of ice-cream also increases the willingness-to-pay to avoid information about the shock. The effect is moderated by the ice-cream likeability and the fear of shocks. However, we do not observe any effect of the aversive salient information on consumption of ice-cream as compared to consumption of a plain bread. The existence of information consumption substitution (ICS) has important practical implications. ICS implies that seemingly healthy people may be at greatest risk of information delay regarding their health, and good economic times may discourage due diligence. A better understanding of the conditions under which costly intrinsic information avoidance happens could help us identify ways to diminish the negative impacts of such behaviors.	Monica Capra, Joshua Tasoff and Jin Xu
d2_s04_re	d2_s04_re	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room E	Roundtable: How can the profession respond to the climate emergency?	MARCO	CASARI	e256fe	Università di Bologna	Opening talk by chair	NA	NA
d2_s04_re	d2_s04_re	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room E	Roundtable: How can the profession respond to the climate emergency?	AXEL	OCKENFELS	f88d87	University of Cologne	Interacting with policymakers	NA	NA
d2_s04_re	d2_s04_re	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room E	Roundtable: How can the profession respond to the climate emergency?	GIANLUCA	GRIMALDA	563e8d	Jaume I University	Scientists as activists	NA	NA
d2_s04_rf	d2_s04_rf	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room F	Social Norms and Morals IV	SABRINA	JEWORREK	bd50d0	Halle Institute for Economic Research	Alone at Home: The Impact of Social Distancing on Norm-Consistent Behavior	Around the globe, the Covid-19 pandemic has turned daily live upside down, with social distancing being the most effective method to contain the virus until herd immunity is reached. By conducting two experiments and using the priming method to manipulate social isolation recollections, we study whether social distancing has affected norms of prosociality and norm compliance ―a question that is also relevant beyond the current pandemic in a world that becomes more digitalized every day, leading to a decline in in-person interactions. The normative expectations of what behaviors others would approve or disapprove in our experimental setting did not change. Looking at actual behavior, however, we find that persistent social distancing indeed caused a decline in prosociality, even after the relaxation of social distancing rules and in times of optimism. At the same time, our results contain some good news since subjects seem still to care for norms and become more prosocial once again after we draw their attention to the empirical norm of how others have previously behaved in a similar situation.	Sabrina Jeworrek, Joschka Waibel
d2_s04_rf	d2_s04_rf	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room F	Social Norms and Morals IV	TIMO	FREYER	678bf0	Uni Bonn	Inherited Inequality and the Dilemma of Meritocracy	A defining feature of meritocratic societies is that resource distributions reflect individual merits. However, in a world where parents care for their children, this introduces a dilemma. If one pair of parents works harder than a second pair of parents, the first pair has merited the option to bequest more resources to their child. On the other hand, none of the two children has merited to inherit more resources than the other. Hence, if the two children end up with different amounts of resources, this inherited inequality may be considered simultaneously fair and unfair from a meritocratic standpoint. We develop a simple theoretical framework that relates distributional preferences regarding inherited and classic (i.e., non-inherited) inequality and run a preregistered survey experiment with about 550 US citizens to investigate how people approach this dilemma. In the experiment, impartial spectators redistribute payments between pairs of individuals. We vary whether inequality in the initial distribution is based on luck or effort, and whether spectators redistribute between individuals who have worked on a task themselves to earn money (classic inequality) or between individuals who differentially benefit from the work of real-life friends (inherited inequality). Spectators equalize a much larger fraction of initial inequality if it is based on luck instead of effort. Yet, they do not differentiate much between situations in which they redistribute between individuals who have worked themselves and situations in which they redistribute between individuals who have differentially profited from their friends' work. The results suggest that people tend to accept inequality as long as it is grounded in differential merit at some stage and may help to explain why many people oppose redistributive policies in the real world.	Timo Freyer, Laurenz R. K. Günther
d2_s04_rf	d2_s04_rf	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room F	Social Norms and Morals IV	CRISTINA	CATTANEO	40e7a0	EIEE	Social information and waste disposal	Social information programs are an effective instrument to nudge behavioural change. The existing evidence documents their ability to influence behaviour in various settings, but little has been done in the context of waste disposal. We conduct a large-scale field experiment of norm-based feedback nudges on unsorted household waste. The social information program is implemented by an Italian multi-utility that employs a hybrid Pay-as-you-Throw collection system. Households are assigned a maximum number of solid waste units yearly and pay a fixed amount when the quantities are below such limit. For each unit exceeding the cap, customers pay per unit. Within the program, a treated group of customers receives quarterly reports with information on the volume of unsorted waste compared to the average waste of similar customers living in the same city, while a control group receives nothing. We deliver two types of nudges to the treated customers: a standard report with norm-based feedback and a standard report also containing a reference to the disposal cap. We confirm the effectiveness of the social information nudges also in the context of unsorted waste disposal. However, we find that the standard report generates larger waste reduction than the report that provides customers with information about the cup. Finally, we find suggestive evidence that the social information nudges do not produce negative externalities on sorted waste disposal.	Jacopo Bonan, , Giovanna d'Adda, Arianna Galliera, Massimo Tavoni
d2_s04_rf	d2_s04_rf	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room F	Social Norms and Morals IV	TILMAN	FRIES	12cd7e	WZB Berlin	Priors and Prejudice	Social media and internet search engines give easy access to information about others. This paper studies the behavioral consequences when individuals know more about others they interact with. In principle, such increased knowledge limits the ability of decision makers to signal their type through their actions. If decision makers want to signal a high moral type, increased knowledge in turn decreases the supply of moral behavior. However, factors that lead to "unlearning", such as a belief that people can change or that yesterday's news might be forgotten, can keep reputational incentives strong even as individuals get to know more about each other's past. I test the behavioral mechanisms in an experiment and investigate factors that lead to unlearning.	Tilman Fries
d2_s04_rf	d2_s04_rf	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room F	Social Norms and Morals IV	EMILIANO	HUET-VAUGHN	628ecf	Pomona College	The Shape of Moral Values	We experimentally measure the price of moral values by eliciting changes in willingness to pay for a commodity ex post exposure to information about the commodity's harm to a third party. We find that making the moral harm salient significantly reduces willingness to pay for consumption deemed to be morally harmful and increases the perceived moral harm of the commodity. Counter-information partially offsets these effects. We characterize the type of moral reasoning into behavior that is consistent with mariginalist utliitarian logic vs. deontology; we find little support for marginal moral cost thinking - rather, the moral tax on consumption is a fixed not per unit cost (the first cut - to someone else - is the deepest).	Emiliano Huet-Vaughn, Minh Pham, Josh Tasoff, Eva Vivalt
d2_s04_rg	d2_s04_rg	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room G	Social & Group Behavior II	SIMEON	SCHUDY	fa7a09	LMU Munich	Leadership matters more than you think: On the (misperceived) determinants of team success in non-routine tasks	Team-based organizational structures have become the building block of modern firms and scholars widely agree that teamwork is an important component of economic success and innovation. The most pressing question for managers (and scholars alike) is what renders teamwork in complex problems successful. Only when forming the right expectations about the main drivers of performance, teams can cost-effectively succeed. This study elicits expectations about the relative importance of team composition (team size, gender composition, and task experience) and team governance structures (monetary and non-monetary team incentives and leadership) for team performance in a non-routine task in a representative sample (n=1,500) using an incentivized discrete choice experiment. We exploit the unique opportunity to contrast these expectations with actual performance data from 1,358 teams working on the non-routine tasks for which the expectations were elicited. We collected the performance data in a series of large-scale field experiments in which the respective team characteristics and team governance structures varied. Our results reveal that participants correctly perceive gender diversity in teams and experience among team members as important predictors of team success, and they (also correctly) expect monetary incentives (team bonuses and tournaments with prizes) to be highly effective in improving performance. However, participants misperceive the efficacy of two important elements of team governance: First, participants overestimate the efficacy of tournaments without prizes (i.e. rank / status incentives). Second, they substantially underestimate the important role of leadership for team performance. Participants' socio-economic background characteristics and participants' own leadership and teamwork experiences do not substantially mitigate the observed misperceptions.	Florian Englmaier, Dominik Grothe, David Schindler, and Simeon Schudy (speaker)
d2_s04_rg	d2_s04_rg	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room G	Social & Group Behavior II	GIUSEPPE	ATTANASI	9b59db	Sapienza University of Rome	Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Motivators on Creative Collaboration: The Effect of Sharing Rewards	Charness and Grieco (2019) have experimentally shown that financial incentives have a positive impact on individual creativity, but only in the case of &ldquo;close&rdquo; creativity, i.e., when there are constraints to the creative task that a subject has to accomplish. In this paper, we build on the same &ldquo;close&rdquo; creativity assignments of Charness and Grieco (2019) and analyze with undergraduate students and with experts in creativity the interplay between monetary incentives and group cooperation in creative assignments. We introduce a novel model of intrinsic vs. extrinsic motivation to group collaboration in creativity and run a theorydriven experiment to test our experimental hypotheses on the crowding out of intrinsic motivation due to extrinsic motivation to group creativity. We find more creativity in the group than in the individual treatment, apart when there are explicit monetary incentives to co-working (sharing ideas) in the creative assignment. Therefore, while Charness and Grieco (2019) show a positive interplay between monetary incentives (extrinsic individual motivation) and &ldquo;close&rdquo; creativity at the individual level, we provide evidence of a negative interplay between monetary incentives and &ldquo;close&rdquo; creativity at the group level (crowding out of intrinsic group motivation). Furthermore, and again in line with our model predictions, the latter effect is found more in the experimental sessions with experts in creativity than in those with undergraduate students.	Giuseppe Attanasi   (Sapienza University of Rome, Italy), Ylenia Curci (UTBM, Belfort, France), Patrick Llerena (University of Strasbourg, France), Giulia Urso (Gran Sasso Science Institute, L'Aquila, Italy)
d2_s04_rg	d2_s04_rg	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room G	Social & Group Behavior II	GUGLIELMO	BRISCESE	da7993	The University of Chicago	Bridging America's Divide on Abortion, Guns and Immigration: An Experimental Study	We study individuals&rsquo; willingness to engage with others who hold opposing views on polarizing policies. We invite a representative sample of 2,500 Americans to listen to pre-recorded views of fellow countrymen and women expressing their opinion about abortion, gun ownership, and immigration. We experimentally test whether knowing that the other person shares the same beliefs on fundamental human rights increases people&rsquo;s willingness to listen, which we compare against a treatment emphasizing agreement on more futile principles and a pure control group. We record high baseline levels (more than 80%) of willingness to listen to someone holding opposing views, suggesting that it is possible to encourage dialogue between polarized groups. Agreements on fundamental values or futile principles don&rsquo;t necessarily increase further individuals&rsquo; willingness to listen, but make people more likely to adopt less extreme opinions.	Guglielmo Briscese, Michele Belot
d2_s04_rg	d2_s04_rg	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room G	Social & Group Behavior II	MELANIE	PARRAVANO	022740	Newcastle University Business School	Social capital inequalities in a sparse network: The effect of population size, recommendations and long-distance relations’ costs.	We analyse the effect of triadic relations on the development of social capital inequalities in a sparse network of friendly relations. For this purpose, we propose a dynamical network model in which the intensity of the links among the nodes varies depending on how large the overlap of their common friends is. The main implication of this study is that the natural preference of individuals to establish positive relations with individuals with whom they share friends (and /or enemies) and the limitations in the number of relations that individuals can maintain inevitably leads to inequalities and hierarchies unless the community is small enough to be fully connected. We focus our analysis on the inequality coefficient GSC that measures the distribution of the individual social capital quantified as the amount of attention that an individual receives from their friends. We find that GSC increases with i) the size of the community, ii) the globalization (i.e., the cost reduction of long-distance communications), and iii) the relevance of recommendations to form an indirect opinion about other members of the community. We also consider the effect on GSC of the reciprocity and fidelity in dual relations. We show that this stylized model can shed light on the impact of the new technologies of communication on the social inequalities.	Antonio Parravano,  Melanie Parravano
d2_s04_rg	d2_s04_rg	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room G	Social & Group Behavior II	LORENZO	SPADONI	4d40d3	UNIVERSITY OF CASSINO AND SOUTHERN LAZIO	Voluntary Partnerships For Equally Sharing Contribution Costs - Theoretical Aspects and Experimental Evidence -	Contributors to public goods with individual commitment power decide before voluntarily contributing, whether and when to join the (sub)group whose partners equally share the cost of their contributions. We analyse the voluntary formation of the cost sharing partnership, when it is internally (no partner wants to opt out) and externally (no outsider wants to opt in) stable, and how (un)stable partnerships affect contribution behaviour. All contributors decide between joining and not joining for all possible conditions before learning in which random sequence individual contributors successively enter or not the partnership. After being informed about whether there is no partnership and, when there is one, how many belong to it, and whether one is partner or outsider, all group members independently contribute. So participants can freeride not only by abstaining from voluntary contributions, but also by not joining the partnership. Theoretically participants would form a stable cost sharing partnership whose partners (outsiders) contribute maximally (minimally); experimental evidece shows that hardly any such benchmark behavior exists. Instead we confirm a strong inclination to join the partnership to avoid or at least weaken freeridng incentives.	Irene Maria Buso, Daniela Di Cagno, Werner Gueth, Lorenzo Spadoni
d2_s04_rm	d2_s04_rm	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room M	Market design: Matching & Auctions	KATHARINA	KÜTTER	aac491	RWTH Aachen	Does Expectation-Based Loss Aversion Explain Non-Truthful Preference Reporting in Strategy-Proof Matching Mechanisms?	Expectation-based loss aversion (EBLA) has been suggested as an explanation of preference misreporting in strategy-proof student-school matching mechanisms. This is because reporting one&rsquo;s true ranking might create an outcome expectation that proves too optimistic ex post, leading to disappointment. To avoid such disappointment, it might be optimal to rank a less desirable but more probable outcome over a more desirable but less probable one. We test EBLA in a simple experiment with only two possible outcomes. Varying the probabilities of the outcomes in a between-subjects design, we do not find evidence that EBLA explains preference misreporting, as the treatment effect is small and statistically insignificant. Responses to debriefing questions suggest that misreporting is likely driven by game-form misperception rather than EBLA.	Roy Chen, Peter Katuščák, Thomas Kittsteiner, Katharina Kütter
d2_s04_rm	d2_s04_rm	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room M	Market design: Matching & Auctions	ALEJANDRO	ROBINSON-CORTES	3d8e16	University of Exeter	An Experimental Study of Decentralized Matching	We present an experimental study of decentralized one-to-one matching markets, such as labor or marriage markets. In our experiments, participants are informed of everyone&rsquo;s preferences and can make arbitrary non-binding match offers that are realized only when a certain period of market inactivity has elapsed. We find three main results. First, stable matches are the prevalent outcome. Second, in markets with multiple stable matches, the median stable match is selected most frequently. Third, the cardinal representation of ordinal preferences substantially impacts which stable match gets selected. Furthermore, the endogenous dynamic paths that yield stability exhibit several persistent features.	Federico Echenique; Alejandro Robinson-Cortes; Leeat Yariv
d2_s04_rm	d2_s04_rm	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room M	Market design: Matching & Auctions	SHIGEHIRO	SERIZAWA	5e4445	Osaka University	Factors causing non-sincere bidding in the Vickrey auction	The Vickrey auction is strategy-proof. In other words, it is a dominant strategy for each bidder to bid sincerely, i.e., to bid her true valuation. However, many experimental papers report that most subjects deviate from sincere bidding in the Vickrey auction. To explain non-sincere bidding, some authors propose hypothesizes such as the joy of winning (Cooper and Fang, 2008), the cognitive limit of contingent reasoning (Li, 2017), the underestimation of possible losses (Georganas et al. 2017), spiteful behaviors (Nishimura 2011), etc. These papers suggests that several factors might cause non-sincere bidding the Vickrey auction.   This paper focuses factors of subjects&rsquo; understanding the Vickrey auction, and social preferences, and investigates how much each factor causes non-sincere bidding by introducing those factors into experiments one by one.   Before conducting experiments, we gave two sets of questions, Quiz 1 and Quiz 2. Quiz 1 is of ten minutes of ten questions and checks if subjects understand the Vickrey auction rule well, and the detailed explanation of Quiz 1 followed. Quiz 2 is of twenty minutes. In Treatment 2 (T2) and Treatment 4 (T4), Quiz 2 includes a hint of strategy-proofness while in Treatment 1 (T1) and Treatment 3 (T3), Quiz 2 does not include such a hint, but only the computations of payoffs in the Vickrey auction. The detailed explanation of Quiz 2s also followed.    If subjects play the auction only against PC, social preferences will have no effect. Based on this idea, we investigated if social preferences have effects in the Vickrey auction. In T3 and T4, human subjects play the auction only against PC, while in T1 and T2, only human subjects play the auction.   In all treatments, the majority of subjects obtained the full scores in both of Quiz 1 and Quiz 2. This means that (i) most subjects in all treatments understand the Vickrey auction rule very well. Our experimental data indicates that (ii) sincere bid rates in T2 (49%) and T4 (62%) are much higher than those in T1 (25%) and T3 (33%), i.e., the hint of strategy-proofness substantially increases sincere bid rates. The regression in T2 and T4 critically indicates that (iii) the more scores subjects obtained in Quiz 2 involving the hint of strategy-proofness, the more they bid sincerely while the regression in T1 and T3 indicates (iv) the scores of Quiz 2 involving only the computations of payoffs strategy-proofness have no correlation with sincere bid rates. The results (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) imply that only understanding the Vickrey auction rule is not enough for subjects to bid sincerely, but realizing strategy-proofness is necessary.  Our experimental data indicates that (v) sincere bid rates in T1 (25%) and T2 (49%) are lower than those in T3 (33%) and T4 (62%), but the differences are smaller, ie, although social preferences affects sincere bid rates, its effect is relatively small.   Thus, the major factor causing non-sincere bidding in the Vickrey auction is subjects&rsquo; inabilities to realize strategy-proofness, and the effect of social preferences is smaller even though it exists.  	SERIZAWA, Shigehiro, SHIMADA, Natsumi, and TSE, Tiffany Tsz Kwan
d2_s04_rm	d2_s04_rm	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room M	Market design: Matching & Auctions	ESSI	KUJANSUU	25bd98	UNIVERSITY OF INNSBRUCK	Competition and Efficiency of Public Procurement	Public procurement auctions suffer frequently from low competition. Previous literature has identified two key policies for improving competition: increasing the number of potential bidders and lowering entry costs. We study theoretically (and experimentally) how these two factors interact in a discrete auction model, using both k-level thinking and mixed strategy Nash equilibrium (MSNE) solution concepts. We find that k-level thinking models generate over-entry, a common result in auction experiments, while these models do not systematically produce over-bidding, another common experimental finding. Our MSNE analysis finds that lowering entry costs is often more effective in generating competition than inviting more bidders to the auction, particularly when entry costs are high. Increasing the number of bidders may even worsen auction outcomes in a high entry cost environment. This result does not hold for the k-level model: increasing the number of potential bidders induces low k-level thinking agents to bid more competitively regardless of entry costs.	Ari Hyytinen, Mitri Kitti, Essi Kujansuu, and Janne Tukiainen
d2_s04_rm	d2_s04_rm	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room M	Market design: Matching & Auctions	MICHELA	BOLDRINI	90707c	Bocconi University	Taming Tech Giants’ Algorithms: what do consumers know (and want)? An analysis of the Amazon Buy-Box case	Many digital platforms operate as two-sided markets, facilitating the matching between sellers and buyers. The Amazon case is particularly interesting because of the dual role the tech giant plays: Amazon both controls the rules of the game, through platform design choices, and participates as a player itself, operating as a seller. What do consumers know about Amazon&rsquo;s platform functioning? Would they behave differently if they knew how the type and the amount of information they are provided with is filtered/manipulated? To answer these questions, we empirically investigate consumers' search and purchase behavior in an online quasi-field experiment.	Michela Boldrini; Francesco Clavorà Braulin
d2_s04_rq	d2_s04_rq	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender	JOERG	OECHSSLER	1a4885	University of Heidelberg	Do women shy away from risky skill games?	A risky skill game is a game in which skill plays an important role but outcomes are also strongly influenced by random factors. Examples are poker or blackjack but also many economic activities like trading on financial markets. In an online experiment we let subjects choose how often they want to play a risky skill game. We find that women play only half as many rounds in risky skill games if the influence of chance is large. There is no gender difference if the influence of chance is small or if outcomes depend exclusively on chance.	Marco Lambrecht, Joerg Oechssler
d2_s04_rq	d2_s04_rq	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender	HOLGER A.	RAU	ba675a	University of Goettingen	Gender and Collusion	Many cartels are formed by managers, not by firms as collectives. However, most of the literature in industrial economics neglects individuals&rsquo; incentives to form cartels. Although oligopoly experiments reveal important insights on individuals acting as firms, they largely ignore individual heterogeneity, such as gender differences. We experimentally analyze gender differences in collusion, where cooperation harms passive outsiders. To study the impact of social distance, we compare behavior in a within-subjects setting. First, subjects are anonymous, whereas personal characteristics are disclosed in the second game. Results show that guilt-averse women collude less often when it harms third parties. No gender difference is found absent negative externalities. Lowering social distance shows that the findings are robust for women who do not become more collusive.	Justus Haucap, Christina Heldman, Holger A. Rau
d2_s04_rq	d2_s04_rq	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender	YIMING	LIU	a5d428	Humboldt University of Berlin and WZB Berlin Social Science Center.	Gender Bias in Merit-Based College Admissions	Merit-based college admissions promise to offer every student a fair chance at educational and later-life achievements. Using administrative and survey data from Chinese college admissions, a centralized school matching system where test scores on the college entrance exam alone determine schools' preferences, we study to what extent this fairness promise is fulfilled. We find that compared to male students of the same academic performance in high school, female students are 16 percent less likely to enter an elite university on average. Two channels drive this result. First, female students perform worse in the high-stakes entrance exam. Second, female students' matching outcomes are worse because they employ different preference ranking strategies. They are more likely only to list safety schools in their choice portfolio even though the parallel matching mechanism encourages truth-telling. They also choose low-quality local schools more often over high-quality non-local schools. Survey evidence suggests that differences in strategy are likely an outcome of female students' less intra-household bargaining power.	Yi Han, Yiming Liu, Xinye Zheng
d2_s04_rq	d2_s04_rq	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender	MÜGE	SÜER	decb73	Wirtschaftswissenschaftliche Fakultät Humboldt University Berlin	Do women really comply more? Experimental evidence from a representative sample	Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, most countries heavily rely on individual compliance with new behavior recommendations. Previous survey-based studies revealed gender differences in compliance with COVID-19 recommendations. We developed a compliance game that allows us to study compliance in a controlled environment. Our study consists of two online experiments run with separate samples that are representative of the German adult population. The main experiment (N=1600) directly measures compliance behavior. In the second experiment (N=522), participants are confronted with a vignette of the main experiment in order to study potential explanations for the behavior observed in the main experiment. We obtain three main results: First, compliance does not vary between women and men but with perceived risk and beliefs. Second, men and women equally adjust their compliance decision to new information. Third, women are expected to be more compliant than men whereas perceived social appropriateness of compliance does not differ by gender.	Müge Süer, Anna Balleyer, Nicola Cerutti, Jana Friedrichsen, Gyula Seres
d2_s04_rq	d2_s04_rq	2 Sep 2022	15:30 - 17:00	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender	MARIANNA	BAGGIO	722269	Joint Research Centre - European Commission	Employees’ reaction to gender pay transparency: an online experiment	The aim of pay transparency measures is to make pay systems less opaque and to reduce the gender pay gap. To investigate the behavioural implications of pay transparency measures, we ran an incentivized online experiment focused on the effects on employees&rsquo; performance, provision of extra effort and actions to correct pay disparities.  We found that pay transparency, as devised in our experiment, does not disrupt the provision of effort by employees, but it does interfere with the provision of extra effort, discouraging employees to work beyond the minimum required. We found that although the total number of requests for compensation did not significantly change, pay transparency increased grounded requests and decreased unjustified ones. Our evidence also shows that employees are more sensitive to lower relative wage with respect to own gender, rather than gender pay gap. However, men managers who are confronted with a predominantly male manager composition react positively to reinforce it, while a dominance of female managers composition triggers a negative reaction.  We discuss potential policy implications of these findings and argue that more research should be carried out to better understand the efficiency of transparency measures, with a particular interest on gender reference groups, as well as both horizontal and vertical comparisons.	Marianna Baggio and Ginevra Marandola
d2_s05_rb	d2_s05_rb	2 Sep 2022	17:00 - 18:15	Room B	Invited Session III: Theory Driven Experiments II	SIGRID	SUETENS	080ac1	Tilburg University	Rational cooperation and reputation effects	In repeated prisoners’ dilemmas with a known end, cooperation rates are well above zero. This result cannot be justified from the perspective of non-cooperative game theory based on the assumption that all individuals are payoff maximizers and this is common knowledge. However, a model that mildly relaxes these assumptions by relying on the existence of a small fraction of reciprocators in the population can be sufficient to rationalize cooperation (Kreps et al., 1982). Key is the assumption that individuals are uncertain about the type of their partner in the repeated interaction. The uncertainty introduces a correlation between past actions and beliefs about future actions, which gives rational maximizers an incentive to mimic reciprocators as long as there is scope for future interaction, and gives them a chance to update beliefs about the type of their partner in the course of the interaction. We design a laboratory experiment aimed at uncovering the behavioral relevance of the uncertainty assumption. We find that the presence of reciprocators and the assumption of uncertainty are crucial to explain behavior in our experiment, and provide evidence consistent with rational updating	Maria Bigoni, Ernesto Reuben
d2_s05_rb	d2_s05_rb	2 Sep 2022	17:00 - 18:15	Room B	Invited Session III: Theory Driven Experiments II	ARNO	RIEDL	37fb60	Maastricht University	Intertemporal Social Preferences	We examine the relationship between time delay and generosity in a laboratory experiment using modified dictator games. In a between-subject design, we vary the time of payout for the dictator, the receiver or both. In a within-subject design, we vary the endowment of the dictator as well as the price of giving. We derive and test hypotheses based on a single-self and dual-self model regarding the level of giving as well as the price sensitivity of giving. We find that both models' hypotheses are largely rejected. There is no difference in discounting for self and others and the average level of giving is independent of time delay. However, the price sensitivity of giving does change with time delay. When there is no delay, giving decreases with increasing price, whereas with any delay giving appears to be price insensitive. When looking for gender differences none are detected with respect to the level of giving. However, the price sensitivity of men and women differs greatly. When there is no delay, giving of men decreases with its price whereas giving of women is price insensitive. When time delay is introduced, giving of men becomes price insensitive and giving of women increases with increasing price. We show that choices are largely rationalizable and that the observed differences are not driven by differences in rationalizability of choices or differences in time discounting.	NA
d2_s05_rb	d2_s05_rb	2 Sep 2022	17:00 - 18:15	Room B	Invited Session III: Theory Driven Experiments II	LORENZ	GOETTE	eaef1a	National University of Singapore	Heterogeneity of Gain-Loss Attitudes and Expectations-Based Reference Points	Existing tests of reference-dependent preferences study variation of the hypothesized reference point under the assumption of universal loss aversion. Yet, recent empirical work broadly recognizes that often up to a third of individuals cannot be characterizes as loss-averse, instead weighting gains more heavily than commensurately-sized losses. This challenges the validity of previous tests of reference-dependent models, providing a potential explanation for the body of conflicting evidence. We examine the role of heterogeneity in gain-loss attitudes in the context of expectations-based reference points. We implement pre-registered experiments on labor supply and exchange, in which we first measure gain-loss attitudes and then examine the treatment effect of a change in rational expectations. We document strongly heterogeneous treatment effects over gain-loss attitudes as predicted by the leading model of expectations-based reference dependence (Koszegi and Rabin, 2006, 2007). Our findings provide foundational support for references points as derived from expectations, explain inconsistencies across prior empirical exercises, and provide a methodological blueprint for future tests of reference-dependent behavior.	Pol Campos-Mercade, Thomas Graeber
d3_s01_ra	d3_s01_ra	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room A	Applied Economics	DAVID	BILÉN	04cc21	University of Gothenburg	Do carbon labels cause consumers to reduce their emissions? Evidence from a large scale natural experiment	In this paper I  use individual consumer data from a large-scale natural experiment (N=309 818) to study if carbon footprint labels, a social comparison module and nudging consumers with climate friendly substitutes, cause consumers to reduce their grocery carbon emissions.  I exploit a difference-in-difference setting where one  supermarket unexpectedly, from one day to the next, introduced labels on around 3000 products with their carbon footprint, while another similar  supermarket did not.  I find an average reduction in emissions of around 2 percent from carbon labeling, which is smaller than found in most previous studies based on lab or field experiments.	David Bilén
d3_s01_ra	d3_s01_ra	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room A	Applied Economics	RAPHAEL	BRADE	f37bcd	University of Erfurt	Relative Performance Feedback and University Completion	How to improve long-term academic achievement? We use field experiments to provide first evidence for an easily scalable and cost-effective behavioral intervention that helps students graduate earlier. Treated students receive relative feedback on their accumulated credit points. Overall, this raises eighth and ninth semester graduation rates by about four percentage points without affecting the dropout decision and improves grades by 0.064 standard deviations. Further analyses show that the effects are heterogeneous and concentrated around the average: low-performing above-average students respond positively, while effects are negative for high-performing not-above-average students. We discuss theoretical and institutional explanations for the pattern of results.	Raphael Brade, Oliver Himmler, Robert Jäckle
d3_s01_ra	d3_s01_ra	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room A	Applied Economics	LARS	BEHLEN	f82eaf	University of Erfurt	CAN DEFAULTS CHANGE BEHAVIOR WHEN POST-INTERVENTION EFFORT IS REQUIRED?	Little is known about the effectiveness of defaults whenmoving the target outcome requires substantial post-intervention effort. In two field experiments, we change the university exam sign-up procedure to &ldquo;opt-out&rdquo; for a single exam (Exp1), and for many exams (Exp2). Both interventions increase sign-up at the beginning of the semester. Downstream, at the end of the semester, opt-out increases exam participation for a single but not for many exams. For the single exam, effects on passing are heterogeneous: students responsive to unrelated university requests convert increased sign-ups into passed exams. For non-responsive students, increased sign-ups result in failed exams due to no-shows. Defaults can thus be effective but need to be carefully targeted.	Lars Behlen, Oliver Himmler, Robert Jäckle
d3_s01_ra	d3_s01_ra	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room A	Applied Economics	BRIAN	JABARIAN	54e157	Paris School of Economics	Digital Propaganda, Critical Thinking and Stable Preferences	In this paper, we consider a principal whose returns are dependent on public opinion on an ambivalent issue (legitimate pros and cons exist simultaneously). Principals must foresee and defend what their audience wants, but the issue's ambivalence makes their judgment difficult. We present a model that allows the principal to decide when and how to run an experiment&nbsp;to maximize approval from a stable audience. Agents who express a stable preference about an ambivalent issue do so after performing an&nbsp;incentivized "critical thinking" task,&nbsp;completing&nbsp;their self-knowledge in a stable way. We estimate the&nbsp;parameters of the model by launching&nbsp;such an&nbsp;incentivized experiment over a representative&nbsp;US sample (N = 732).	Brian Jabarian, Elia Sartori
d3_s01_ra	d3_s01_ra	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room A	Applied Economics	LUCA	FUMARCO	d15034	Masaryk University	Judging by the Color of their Skin - Racial Bias in Relative Assessment of Individuals’ Performance	We use real-world data to investigate racial bias and the different mechanisms through which it affects individuals&rsquo; performance assessment. We contribute to the literature in three ways. First, we investigate racial bias&rsquo; role in the relative assessment of performances. Second, we investigate whether this bias in relative assessment is implicit. Third, we investigate the role of attention discrimination. We study US professional boxing fights between boxers of different ethnicities and find that white boxers are more likely to receive top scores from white judges than from non-white judges. Moreover, we find that white boxers are more likely to receive the top score when the city of the fight has a largely white population, and when the in-ring referee is not white. Furthermore, when the crew of judges is entirely white, white boxers have greater chances to win. Also, we find that this racial bias is implicit, since it is larger in highly paced fights, in fights with lower visibility, and in fights where boxers perform very similarly. Finally, this racial implicit bias emerges in the late rounds of the fight and might be due to attention discrimination, that is, white judges&rsquo; (subconscious) biased allocation of attention to positive information from white boxers; this final result suggests that US boxing fights are affected by in-group bias or nepotism, rather than out-group bias or discrimination.	Ali Ahmed, Luca Fumarco, Vasja Sivec
d3_s01_rb	d3_s01_rb	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room B	Decision Theory & Beliefs II	DORON	SONSINO	e3e5ed	CIIM, CYPRUS INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE OF MANAGEMENT	The Decrease in Confidence with Forecast Extremity	Three return forecasting experiments and a panel of more than 14,000 CFOs&rsquo; forecasts of the S&amp;P 500 annual return suggest that forecast confidence decreases as the forecasts diverge from zero, in the positive or negative direction. The decrease in confidence reflects in longer forecast intervals, weaker belief in the accuracy of the forecasts, and larger perceived volatility estimates. Assuming cumulative prospect theory, the increase in perceived volatility with forecast optimism is fast enough to fully offset the CFOs&rsquo; response to more optimistic expectations in about 20% of the cross-sample comparisons. Permutation tests, more generally, confirm that the decrease in confidence significantly delays the response to optimistic forecasts. The decrease in confidence alleviates the underestimation of volatility in cases of optimistic forecasts, but even the optimistic CFOs underestimate the VIX volatility by more than 50%. A complementary empirical analysis reveals significant cross-sectional and time-series correlations between the absolute realized returns on the stocks composing the S&amp;P 500 list and estimates of the stocks&rsquo; contemporaneous volatility. The correlations emerge in five levels of analysis and separately show for positive and negative sub-sequences of the returns.   	Doron Sonsino, Yefim Roth
d3_s01_rb	d3_s01_rb	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room B	Decision Theory & Beliefs II	ELIF	OSUN	528144	University of Maryland	Effect of Feedback on Beliefs About Self-Ability	Perceptions about self-ability shape making important life decisions; yet people do not always have accurate beliefs about themselves. One way to correct for such distorted beliefs is to give performance feedback. However, as people systematically deviate from the Bayesian benchmark, it is difficult to predict the effect of feedback for correcting biased beliefs. In some settings, people receive feedback in the form of pairwise comparison (such as performance rankings), whereas in other settings they receive noisy feedback (such as exam scores). In this paper, I compare these two signal structures also widely used in the literature and identify the types of biases associated with each signal structure. I then show that belief updating across genders varies by signal type and structure. Finally, I discuss how these findings can shed light onto policy recommendations aimed to decrease the gender gap in self-confidence of men and women with similar performance levels.	Elif Osun
d3_s01_rb	d3_s01_rb	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room B	Decision Theory & Beliefs II	MAJ-BRITT	STERBA	975b6c	University of Konstanz	CANCELED: Lost Control - Beliefs in Meritocracy in Times of Crises	One of the foundational beliefs of US society is that ``man forges his own destiny", that is, hard work and talent will eventually lead to economic success. According to the meritocratic ideal, inequalities in society are to be accepted as long as they reflect differences in individual effort, rather than factors outside individual control. Societal crises, such as the economic and health crises caused by the coronavirus pandemic, typically generate economic inequalities in society which are to a large part due to factors outside individual control. In this paper we investigate how stable the belief in meritocracy (``The American Dream'') is to personal and collective experiences made in societal crises. We present panel data collected in a representative sample of US Americans over a time period of 1.5 years throughout the coronavirus pandemic. Our results show that the belief in meritocracy has declined significantly throughout the pandemic. The decline is of similar magnitude for liberals and conservatives, but much stronger for women than for men. We subsequently investigate to what extend personal experiences, such as job loss, income loss or COVID-19 infections, underlie the observed shifts in meritocratic beliefs. Using a complementary experimental manipulation, in which subjects recall personal experiences from the pandemic, we show that personal experiences in which people feel they lost control over their lives, reduce beliefs in meritocracy. In a second set of results we investigate the relevance of our findings for the political realm: specifically, we investigate how the observed changes in meritocratic beliefs are associated with changes in policy attitudes towards the welfare system and economic redistribution at the individual level. This advances our understanding of how beliefs in meritocracy shape policy attitudes as a central element of peoples' worldviews and political ideology.	Maj-Britt Sterba, Sören Harrs
d3_s01_rb	d3_s01_rb	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room B	Decision Theory & Beliefs II	JAN	POTTERS	9cd829	Tilburg University	How fundamental is the Fundamental Attribution Error ?	When people try to explain the performance of others they tend to underweight the influence of situational constraints. This tendency is considered so pervasive that it has been labeled the Fundamental Attribution Error. The potential importance of this error for business and economics is widely recognized. Even though the error is considered almost a truism in psychology the evidence is not always fully convincing. Often it is impossible the assess whether the beliefs expressed are in fact an error. In the current paper we present an experimental test which remedies this concern. Participants receive a noisy signal about the performance of an agent on a task and determine whether this signal is informative about the agent's ability or about the difficulty of the task (the situational constraint). Our results provide no evidence for the fundamental attribution error. Participants process information in a even-handed manner and do not display any tendency to underestimate the relative influence of the situational factor. This suggests that the fundamental attribution error does not derive from a fundamentally different weighting of different causal factors (dispositional versus situational) but from a difference in the salience, availability, or reliability or the situational information.	Alessandro Castagnetti and Jan Potters
d3_s01_rb	d3_s01_rb	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room B	Decision Theory & Beliefs II	MARCO	CASARI	e256fe	Università di Bologna	Curbing excessive financial risk in the economy: reputation is not enough	We study the interaction between the financial and the real sector in a macroeconomy. Existing experiments about financial intermediaries either study the financial side in isolation, or model the real sector in reduced form (parametric).  Here, financial intermediation can generate macroeconomic risk in both the financial and real sectors. While financial intermediaries support the settlement of transactions in the real sector, they also undertake risky investments, which exhibit negative externalities onto the real sector in case of insolvency. In equilibrium, intermediaries take more risk than what would be socially optimal. We study how two prototypical institutions - one that facilitates the monitoring of intermediaries&rsquo; activities and another that imposes collateral requirements on financial activity - can reduce this externality and increase overall efficiency by insulating the real sector from disruptions in trading activity. Observed performance is weak for the monitoring institution and strong for collateral requirements.	Maria Bigoni,&#9;Gabriele Camera,&#9;Marco Casari
d3_s01_rc	d3_s01_rc	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room C	Public Goods VI	BARTOSZ	JUSYPENKO	3c6e83	University of Warsaw	Using choice experiments to value immovable cultural heritage in Australia	Conservation of cultural heritage often depends on public funding. Determining the socially-optimal extent of this support and designing economically efficient policies requires the measurement of economic values associated with specific heritage items. Although heritage valuation studies form an increasingly important field of applied research, there is a lack of formalized approach. The shift in the political debate towards an emphasis on the benefits for a society has made cultural policymakers increasingly interested in monetary evidence of this value. As citizens became an important source of knowledge about optimal ways to govern resources, the number of contingent valuation method (CVM) applications to cultural goods started growing rapidly. In recent years, more and more of these studies utilize discrete choice experiments (DCE), however, the proliferation of this method to the cultural economics has been slower than in other fields and hence its potential has not been fully exploited yet.  CVM and DCE evoke controversies and ethical objections among those professionally involved in culture. DCE studies devoted to heritage present an overly simplified approach in which they have focused on the quality of provision or experience instead of the quality of assets (Wiśniewska 2020). Many other special concerns arising while applying DCE in the cultural arena (i.e. general lack of quality measures, poorly defined and ambiguous attributes) have been neglected. Researchers have been trying to replicate environmental valuation studies outright while not devoting enough attention to culture-specific methodological developments. Hence, most of the applications available in the empirical literature are not on-par with the current state-of-the-art non-market valuation guidelines (e.g., see the report by Lawton et al. 2020).  In this paper, we present a carefully designed study that leverages the above-mentioned limitations and elicits consumer preferences towards heritage conservation strategies. We estimate the monetary value of heritage goods, as expressed in general population WTP. While previous valuations have been carried out for individual sites in the context of a specific plan, our study includes a novel approach to evaluate programs for various categories of cultural heritage. To the best of our knowledge, there is only one study of this kind (Throsby et al. 2021).  We implement DCE with three different valuation tasks &ndash; one for each category of potential cultural heritage conservation: Buildings, Historic sites, and Landscapes. Moreover, we divide each category by the type which is the only category-specific attribute. Other attributes are generalized across categories. We carefully selected them to address the needs of those involved in heritage protection. Some of the attributes are directly related to a given asset and its features, while others describe protection amendments. The attribute matrix has been verified with the large sample of existing tangible assets included in the register. In total, we investigate respondents' preferences towards 33 different types of immovable heritage with various characteristics. Together they form a valuation scenario describing the implementation of a hypothetical protection plan for a hypothetical asset.  The case study deal with various items included in the Victoria Heritage Register (Australia). The data is collected from a representative sample of n=1613 inhabitants of the southeastern state of Victoria.  To convey the valuation task for respondents and reduce their fatigue, typical images of given assets were added. To control for the associated aesthetic bias, we implement three experimental treatments: two alternative images and no image. The design of the study included the necessary components for incentive compatibility of the study, such as consequentiality, and coercive payment, and a binary choice setting (including the status quo alternative), ensuring that respondents reveal their true WTP.  We built three different models using the mixed logit approach to interpret assets in separated categories. We estimated our models in WTP-space which means that the coefficients can be readily interpreted in monetary values by lay readers. Overall, the results show how much respondents are willing to pay for the conservation of various types cultural heritage and the types of assets that are the most preferred. Using imagery increased respondents' engagement in valuation tasks and does not produce any significant biases towards certain heritage types. "No image" treatment resulted in reduced WTP for all types except industrial and mining landscapes. Alternate images do not influence the results.  Overall, our study significantly contributes on the methodological level, demonstrating a new universal tool that enables stakeholders to easily evaluate protection plans for multiple sites with different profiles simultaneously. It is designed, conducted and documented in a manner that supports extrapolating findings to new policy scenarios. This creates the potential for future use of the results in benefit transfer. Providing respondents with credible choice scenarios with well-defined and unambiguous goods allows us better to understand their choices, including social and cultural motivations. As there is a need to raise the quality of SP methods applied to cultural goods, our research can help draw some systematic conclusions. We believe that results will help make cultural policies better matched to contemporary issues, public preferences, and the idea of sustainable development, providing useful implications and leading to more justifiable fund allocation.  	Bartosz Jusypenko, Mikołaj Czajkowski, Ben White
d3_s01_rc	d3_s01_rc	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room C	Public Goods VI	MEHMET YIGIT	GURDAL	254fc2	Bogazici University	CANCELED: Conditional Commitments and Cooperation in Public Goods: Theory and Experimental Evidence	Conditional commitment devices such as price matching guarantees or legal contracts can be highly efficient and improve the outcomes for involved parties. In the context of public goods, however, empirical evidence on the cooperation-enhancing effect of conditional commitments is scarce. In this paper, we demonstrate that conditional commitments can indeed increase voluntary contributions to public goods. First, we theoretically analyze the effect of conditional commitments made through a mediator on contributions towards a public good. In this mediated game, the set of conditional commitments can be chosen such that a strong equilibrium exists, corresponding to the strong mediated equilibrium introduced in Monderer and Tennenholtz (2009). We run laboratory experiments and find, if a strong equilibrium exists, almost all interacting groups use conditional commitments and manage to coordinate on this cooperative equilibrium sustaining cooperation on a high level. When conditional commitments only allow for socially inefficient outcomes, we observe a substantial decline in their utilization, and the cooperation level drops significantly.	Mehmet Y. Gurdal,  Ozgur Gurerk, Yeliz Kacamak, Edip Kart
d3_s01_rc	d3_s01_rc	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room C	Public Goods VI	JULIANE	KOCH	77bb21	Hamburg University	Making and breaking promises: on the voluntary provision of public goods under cost uncertainty	Breaking promises might be easier if one faces unexpectedly high costs for keeping them. Inspired by the pledge and review mechanisms of the Paris Agreement, we investigate the role of cost uncertainty for the voluntary provision of public goods. We provide experimental evidence on the importance of pledge and contribution reviews for sustaining high public good provision levels. We find that cost homogeneity and cost-certainty facilitate compliance with the initial pledges. Under cost-uncertainty, we further demonstrate that cost pledges generate larger contributions to the public good than the prevailing quantity pledges.	Juliane Koch, Prof. Dr. Andreas Lange
d3_s01_rc	d3_s01_rc	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room C	Public Goods VI	MAREK	STEINKE	8ed250	Alfred Weber Institute for Economics, University of Heidelberg	CANCELED: Resource Control and Intertemporal Cooperation	People&rsquo;s decisions influence long-term environmental stability and people care about long-term environmental stability: governments spend time and money on negotiating international agreements on protecting the climate; consumers accept higher costs when buying ecologically produced food or compensating their emissions from flying. However, stability is not achieved in many cases due to failure of cooperation. Thus, while people care about environmental outcomes, they do not achieve sustainability because of unsustainable decisions. We argue and show that cooperation (i.e. sustainability) is negatively affected if the control over a resource switches from one group of decision makers (a &ldquo;dynasty&rdquo;) to another, although (i) all individuals have an interest in the long-term stability of the resource, (ii) long-term cooperation is an equilibrium, and (iii) cooperation works if control over the resource is held by one dynasty only.	Marek Steinke
d3_s01_rc	d3_s01_rc	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room C	Public Goods VI	MATTIE	TOMA	7b70dd	WARWICK BUSINESS SCHOOL	Understanding and Improving Policymakers' Sensitivity to Program Impact	Policymakers routinely make high-stakes decisions of which programs to fund. Assessing the value of a program is difficult and may be affected by bounded rationality. In an experiment with policymakers in the U.S. government, we find that respondents' valuations of programs are inelastic with respect to the program's impact. A complementary experiment among a representative sample of the general public reveals even more pronounced inelasticity in a population less familiar with making program funding decisions. We design and test two portable decision aids, one which presents two alternative programs side-by-side rather than in isolation and another which translates total program cost into an annual cost per person impacted. The decision aids increase elasticity by 0.20 on a base of 0.33 among policymakers and by 0.21 on a base of 0.21 among the general public. We provide evidence that cognitive noise--noisy assessments of complex inputs--is a mechanism that can help explain the observed inelasticity of program valuation with respect to impact.	Mattie Toma and Elizabeth Bell
d3_s01_rd	d3_s01_rd	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences III	MARC	KAUFMANN	b1f97a	Central European University	Excuse-Driven Present Bias	We test whether people behave in a more present-biased way when they can excuse such behavior. We run two experiments, one on the Amazon Mechanical Turk and one with students, to elicit subjects&rsquo; willingness to work (WTW) today and at a future date. We elicit this WTW against an alternative that provides no excuses and one that provides an excuse: while the no-excuse alternative always requires to work, the excuse alternative adds a 10% chance of not having to do extra work. In the first experiment, we find that the WTW today drops by $0.11 more than the WTW in two days when we move from the no-excuse to the excuse alternative, as if the excuse alternative was worth more when it allows avoiding working today. This result cannot be explained by risk and time preferences that do not depend on other alternatives present. In the second experiment, we test another potential excuse besides risk: a different type of task. The results do not support that a different task would act as an excuse for postponing work. For the chance of not having to do work in the future, we get non-significant results that nevertheless point in the same direction as the MTurk results. We discuss both experiments and describe a planned follow-up study with the goal of replicating our finding with excuses based on risk. 	Luca Drucker, Marc Kaufmann
d3_s01_rd	d3_s01_rd	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences III	DANIEL	READ	760e0a	University of Warwick	Comparison-specific preferences:    the attentional dilution effect for delay and risk	In cross-modal decisions the options differ on many attributes and in uni-modal decisions they differ on few. Here we supply new theory and data to understand how discounting for both delay and risk differ between cross-modal and uni-modal decisions. We propose the attentional dilution effect, in which (a) allocation of limited attention to an attribute determines that attribute&rsquo;s decision weight in a choice, and (b) the attention an attribute receives is increasing in the difference between options on that attribute and decreasing in the number of attributes that differ between options. We introduce the random order delayed compensation method and conduct two experiments. Consistent with the attentional dilution effect, we find patience and risk tolerance are higher in cross-modal than uni-modal decisions. We suggest that, since many real-world choices are cross-modal, people may be more patient and risk tolerant in their everyday life than suggested by standard lab experiments.	Daniel Read, Rebecca McDonald, Robin Cubitt
d3_s01_rd	d3_s01_rd	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences III	LINA	LOZANO	59d475	New York University Abu Dhabi	Estimating Preferences for Competition from Convex Budget Sets	The literature in experimental economics has linked the laboratory measurement of preferences for competition with labor market outcomes and educational choices, such as wages and career choices. If preferences for competition are an important determinant of behavior, it is crucial to develop an accurate approach to measure them. In this study, we test whether preferences for competition can be rationalized by a utility function and develop a framework for the joint treatment of preferences for competition and risk. Our design improves on previous work in that it generates a rich data set of individual-level choices, accounts structurally for the relation between risk and competition preferences, and controls carefully for overconfidence. This allows us to test whether choices to enter tournaments are consistent with GARP and to estimate with a high degree of certainty the extent to which these choices are explained by a preference for competition and not by other confounding factors present in the environment. Our findings provide strong evidence for a preference for competition at the individual level that largely satisfies GARP, and that is conceptualized by two terms in the utility function of income obtained in a competitive environment. The first term assumes that preferences for competition affect utility directly through payoffs and the second term allows preferences for competition to influence utility through risk preferences. We discuss the economic implications of both interpretations of preferences for competition and discuss their relation with risk preferences.	Lina Lozano and Ernesto Reuben
d3_s01_rd	d3_s01_rd	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences III	MICHELE	GARAGNANI	ff8949	University of Zurich	Transitivity Violations: Only Noise?	Transitivity violations contradict the very foundations of economic models of choice. Received evidence, however, has often been argued to amount to behavioral noise. We rely on the newly-developed, non-parametric TWT (&ldquo;Time Will Tell&rdquo;) method which uses response times and choice frequencies to distinguish revealed, true preferences from noise. In two different datasets, we find that a sizeable proportion of choice combinations where preferences are revealed do involve transitivity violations. These violations cannot be accounted for by any noise or utility specification within the universe of random utility models. However, the overall proportion of transitivity violations is smaller than reported in the literature. In spite of revealed transitivity violations, preferences estimated through the TWT method predict choices out of sample more accurately than standard parametric random-utility estimations.	Carlos Alós-Ferrer, Ernst Fehr, and Michele Garagnani
d3_s01_rd	d3_s01_rd	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room D	Decision Theory & Preferences III	MARCO	MANTOVANI	54690a	Università degli studi di Milano-Bicocca	CANCELED: Rescheduled to 2 Sep: Decision Theory & Preferences II	NA	NA
d3_s01_re	d3_s01_re	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room E	Economic Development	DEBARATI	GHOSH	f69933	INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY, PATNA	The Linkage between Financial Performance and Environmental Sustainability in the Presence of Credit Constraints: Evidence from Indian Manufacturing Firms	The urgency of climate change caused by rampant environmental degradation remains widely accepted and calls for broadening the sustainability debate. Globally, studies have shown that growth is not decoupled from resource consumption and environmental pressures thereby indicating that there are myriad ways of interaction between the economy and the environment. Firms&rsquo; access to financial, technological, and institutional resources makes them central to this interaction, and therefore their proclivity to adopt environmental protective measures is essential for environmental sustainability.  However, in most developing countries, one of the greatest impediments that firms face is the lack of capital resources that inhibit the designing and implementation of measures to achieve sustainable practices. The purpose of the study is to examine the relationship between corporate environmental sustainability through the lens of energy intensity and the financial performance of firms in the presence of credit constraints. Employing panel data on Indian manufacturing firms the study found an inverted U-shaped relationship between energy intensity and financial performance. While, credit-constraints act as an impediment towards achieving reduced energy intensities, an improvement in financial performance lessens the inimical impact of credit constraints on corporate environmental sustainability. Our findings might help policy formulation in achieving the Mission 2070 Net Zero Emission goal as recently pledged by India.	Debarati Ghosh, Abhishek Dutta, Meghna Dutta
d3_s01_re	d3_s01_re	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room E	Economic Development	MIA	KARABEGOVIC	a141ae	École normale supérieure	Let them play games! Comparing incentivized coordination games to elicit cultural beliefs with un-incentivized surveys	Economists have focused on using incentivized methods to study behavior. At the same time, other social scientists largely rely on qualitative and quantitative surveys to study individual and collective behavior, partly due to the complexity and costs of conducting incentivized experimental games. We conducted incentivized experiments and surveys in Tamil Nadu, India (N = 360) to underscore the insights gained from incentivized coordination games in sensitive contexts (bribing, littering, caste, and gender discrimination) and compare them to unincentivized surveys. We find that biases in surveys unsurprisingly increase in sensitive contexts compared to incentivized methods. We measured the sensitivity of the context on an independent subject pool with the Krupka-Weber (2013) prescriptive norm elicitation method.  The wedge between "own" behavior and "other" people's behavior treatment widens in contexts where social image concerns or sensitivity are high. In socially unacceptable settings, such as religion-based discrimination in the rental market (where 61% believe it is unacceptable), people coordinate on the self-treatment, indicating a high willingness (84%) to rent to someone with a different religion compared to 28% in the other treatment. On the other hand, in socially acceptable contexts, such as bribing a train ticket examiner (where 70% believe it is acceptable), there are no differences in coordination on bribing both in the self-treatment or other-treatment (78% and 77% choose bribe, respectively). We provide a survey hack for social scientists when it is infeasible to use incentivized methods: a simple survey of "other's" behavior was not significantly different from the results in the incentivized games.	Anand Murugesan, Christophe Heintz, Mahendran Chokkalingam, Mia Karabegovic
d3_s01_re	d3_s01_re	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room E	Economic Development	JOE	VECCI	26076b	University of Gothenburg	Understanding Measurement Error in Agriculture: A field experiment	While measurement of agricultural production is critical to empirical development analyses and answering fundamental questions on the role of agriculture in household and individual welfare, there is a lack of understanding about the accuracy of farmer reported crop production and area measurement. In this project, we conduct a large, state-representative survey  in Odisha, India containing self-reported and objective measures of agricultural variables to examine the extent of misreporting and measurement error in agricultural area, production, and yield. We then conduct a field experiment with multiple treatment arms to understand why measurement error exists and in particular, if it is intentional.  We find evidence of measurement error, but show that it is largely unintentional and related to memory and other psychological traits.	Prakashan Veettil,  Yashodha, Victoria Baranov, Vikram Patel
d3_s01_re	d3_s01_re	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room E	Economic Development	FRANCISCO	FLORES	a7fb0b	Universität Kassel	Aspirations, Poverty and Education: Can a role model intervention mitigate the consequences of deprivation?  Lessons from Ecuador	I examine how poverty affects individuals&rsquo; educational ambitions and the effect of a video-role model intervention on reshaping this dynamic. To do so, I study the results from a clustered randomized control trial targeting more than 16,500 high school students in Ecuador. Results show that low and mid-low-income students exhibit significantly lower aspirations than their high-income peers, even after controlling by personal characteristics. Thus, students in the bottom quartiles experience &ldquo;aspirational failure.&rdquo; Evidence suggests that the treatment videos do not affect this dynamic. Indeed, the intervention exhibit general and heterogeneous null effects. Further exploratory estimates indicate that the intervention might reduce female students&rsquo; educational ambitions. My findings contribute to the growing literature aiming for decision-makers to revise their expectations regarding the effectiveness of role models at scale and urge policymakers to give more attention to the psychosocial dimensions of poverty.	Francisco P. Flores T.
d3_s01_rg	d3_s01_rg	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room G	Markets & Macroeconomics	FLORIAN	KERZENMACHER	d24b41	University of Innsbruck	Search Costs and Diminishing Sensitivity	Empirical search cost estimates tend to increase in the size of the transaction, even if search can be done conveniently online. To assess this pattern systematically, we conduct an online search experiment in which we manipulate the price scale while keeping the physical search effort for each price quote constant. Based on a standard search model, we confirm that search cost estimates indeed increase considerably in the price scale. We then modify the search model and allow for diminishing sensitivity, i.e., the tendency that people become less sensitive to price variations of fixed size when the price of the good increases. We find substantial degrees of diminishing sensitivity and obtain search cost estimates that are scale-independent. Importantly, these estimates are in line with subjects' true opportunity costs of time. Finally, we show that the consumer welfare loss from diminishing sensitivity can be quite substantial.	Heiko Karle, Florian Kerzenmacher, Heiner Schumacher, Frank Verboven
d3_s01_rg	d3_s01_rg	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room G	Markets & Macroeconomics	BORIS	VAN LEEUWEN	3cf527	Tilburg University	Lemon faces: Showing pictures of buyers and sellers reduces trade in markets with asymmetric information	Many online platforms show pictures of buyers or sellers, presumably to increase trust and trustworthiness. There can also be adverse effects of showing buyers or sellers, as people may be influenced by irrelevant information on a picture. In this paper we study how showing pictures of buyers or sellers affect outcomes in markets with asymmetric information. In a laboratory experiment, we study classic &ldquo;lemons&rdquo; markets where sellers are better informed than buyers about the quality of an asset. We find that showing pictures of buyers or sellers leads to worse market outcomes. Trade is reduced when faces are displayed and this is driven by more (high-price) offers being rejected. We explore several behavioral mechanisms that could drive this pattern.	Bence Bago, Bruno Biais, Jean-Francois Bonnefon, Boris van Leeuwen
d3_s01_rg	d3_s01_rg	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room G	Markets & Macroeconomics	TAO	WANG	1a89f7	Johns Hopkins University	Perceived Income Risks	State-of-art incomplete-market macro models featuring uninsured idiosyncratic income risks typically use estimated risks from cross-sectional income realizations. But this practice could run into the problem of unobserved heterogeneity, and cannot perfectly approximate the income shocks from the point of view of the agents. This paper calibrates the income risks in a standard OLG/incomplete-market model using a large-scale representative exceptional survey, which directly elicits density forecasts of individuals&rsquo; wage growth. It shows that incorporating a number of salient facts of risks as revealed by reported perceptions in the survey, helps account for the low liquidity-asset holding of a large fraction of agents in the U.S. economy, i.e. hands-to-mouth consumers, and the wealth inequality seen in the data. I also extend the model to allow for possible behavioral bias in perceiving risks by agents and explore its macroeconomic consequences. This extension also serves as an experiment model that breaks down the effects of idiosyncratic income risks on wealth inequality into two channels: ex-ante saving behaviors and the ex-post realized income inequality.	Tao Wang
d3_s01_rg	d3_s01_rg	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room G	Markets & Macroeconomics	RYAN	RHOLES	23cc49	Oxford University	Central Bank Credibility	Central banks have increasingly relied on communication to manage expectations, which is a key tenet of inflation targeting frameworks. In practice, effective communication relies crucially on central bank credibility. Despite this, little is known about the determinants or dynamics of credibility. To this end, we introduce a novel experimental framework to study credibility in relation to expectations management. We find that subjects acting as inflation forecasters exhibit a strong recency bias when forming beliefs about the central bank&rsquo;s forecast credibility and that this recency bias also impacts subjects&rsquo; higher-order forecast moments. We introduce additional treatments to understand how level differences in forecast performance impact perceived credibility, the exact temporal nature of the recency bias we observe, and to explore whether contextualization via additional communication can offset this recency bias (i.e. if banks can &lsquo;talk their way out of trouble&rsquo;).<br><br><br><br><br><br>	Michael McMahon and Ryan Rholes
d3_s01_rg	d3_s01_rg	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room G	Markets & Macroeconomics	ANTONIO	GUARINO	8dfd7d	UNIVERSITY COLLEGE LONDON	Strategic Sophistication and Trading Profits: an Experiment with Professional Traders	We run a laboratory experiment with professional traders. Traders trade an asset over multiple periods after receiving private information about its value. They then participate in a Guessing Game and in a series of other individual decision making tasks. The question we ask is what predicts trading profits. We find strong support for the hypothesis that traders with higher strategic sophistication (higher level k) are those who earn higher profits. Higher profits come from their ability to receive more profits from trading at more advantageous conditions. Other individual characteristics such as cognitive ability (e.g., IQ and CRT) or confidence are not predictive of trading ability.	Marco Angrisani, Marco Cipriani
d3_s01_ri	d3_s01_ri	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Rooom I	Other-regarding Preferences IV	FLÓRA	DRUCKER	9ade60	Central European University	Difficult Merits	The meritocratic fairness view accepts income inequality that is based on differences in individual achievement. However, a particular achievement is not equally difficult for everyone. I study how information about differences in difficulties affects redistributive decisions. I consider two sources of difficulties: external circumstances and individual ability. Participants have to redistribute the income earned by achievement within pairs with information about the relative difficulty of the task within the pair. I find that participants strongly compensate the member of the pair who had a harder job in producing if the difficulties come from an external source, but fully ignore the relative difficulties when they arise from individual ability. This is true for both when participants redistribute between themselves and another subject and when they redistribute between two other subjects. Nevertheless, when involved, those with externally harder tasks compensate themselves while those with easier tasks simply reward performance, suggesting that the latter still believe they deserve more for higher production, even though they learned that their partner had a harder job.	Flóra Drucker
d3_s01_ri	d3_s01_ri	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Rooom I	Other-regarding Preferences IV	MAX	LOBECK	60d16e	UNIVERSITY OF KONSTANZ	Inequality Externality Beliefs and Redistributive Preferences	This paper explores beliefs about how economic inequality changes society and establishes a causal link between such inequality externality beliefs and redistributive preferences. Using a representative survey of 4,371 U.S. citizens, we show that essentially every individual believes that inequality affects society in one way or another. Large and consistent majorities believe inequality leads to more negative societal outcomes through channels such as increased crime or worsening economic factors. These beliefs are widespread across incomes and party lines, contrasting to more narrowly held fairness concerns. We establish a causal link to individuals' redistributive preferences by using exogenously provided video information treatments, and estimate the importance of externality beliefs for redistributive preferences to be roughly two-thirds that of fairness views. Externality-based arguments induce less anger and are more broadly convincing across the income distribution than fairness-based arguments, indicating that focusing on inequality's societal effects is less polarizing than classic fairness discussions.	Max Lobeck, Morten Stostad
d3_s01_ri	d3_s01_ri	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Rooom I	Other-regarding Preferences IV	NINA	WEBER	889093	King's College London	Procedural Fairness and Externalities under Uncertainty	Many risky decisions create positive externalities. For example, the decision to start a business or develop a new technology involves uncertainty about personal gains and losses, but can also have potential positive externalities for wider society. Such externalities provide a reason for policy makers to be interested in incentivising these entrepreneurial decisions. One channel that might affect the nature and viability of such incentives are citizens&rsquo; distributive preferences. In this paper, I provide a theoretical framework and a first experimental test of how potential externalities affect distributive preferences when income is earned through risky decisions. The experimental results indicate that, on average, decision makers who expose themselves to personal risk to create potential positive externalities get rewarded for their decision by third-party spectators. The size of this reward however depends not just on whether the externality realised or not; it is also dependent on the personal income of the risk taker being high. Taken together, these results suggest that distributive preferences may lead to support for institutions that primarily reward ex post lucky risk takers instead of incentivising ex ante risky entrepreneurial activities that could benefit society.	Nina Weber
d3_s01_ri	d3_s01_ri	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Rooom I	Other-regarding Preferences IV	GAYANE	BAGHUMYAN	a679be	CERGE-EI	Taste-based Discrimination against Sexual Minorities: Evidence from Information Provision Experiment	Understanding the underlying motives of discriminatory behavior is important for finding the best strategy to combat discrimination. In this paper, we study how beliefs about biological origins of homosexuality affect people's attitudes towards sexual minority groups. On one hand, when sexual orientation is perceived to be biologically predetermined, thus uncontrollable, people's attitudes might be more tolerant towards sexual minorities. On the other hand, exposure to information about biological sources of homosexuality might increase social distance between participants and sexual minority groups or might even awaken negative sentiments towards them, especially in less tolerant societies. To causally identify the impact of information on discrimination, we conduct an online experiment, where we exogenously manipulate subjects' beliefs about the biological origins of homosexuality, and then measure their social preferences preferences towards sexual minorities. We use money allocation tasks and LGB policy-related questions to capture discrimination. First, we document that sexual-orientation discrimination  is prevalent towards both gays and lesbians. Next, we find that exposure to research evidence about biological causes of sexual orientation fosters discriminatory behavior even more: subjects in the treatment group allocate less money to homosexuals. One possible explanation of this finding is that information increases social distance between sexual minorities and participants, inducing beliefs that homosexuals are dissimilar from them, even biologically. This, in turn, might create less sympathy and thus exacerbate discrimination towards sexual minorities.  	Gayane Baghumyan
d3_s01_ri	d3_s01_ri	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Rooom I	Other-regarding Preferences IV	GIANLUCA	GRIMALDA	563e8d	Jaume I University	Preferences for redistribution in ethnically heterogeneous groups	It has been posited that people demand higher income redistribution when the redistribution recipients are from the same ethnic background as themselves. We test this hypothesis using a version of the third-party allocator game in which a German citizen has to decide how much money to transfer from a stakeholder who has received a fixed monetary endowment to a recipient who has received no money. The recipient&rsquo;s profile is manipulated according to the following dimensions: (a) migration status, encompassing the recipient being (a1) a German citizen, (a2) an economic migrant, or (a3) an asylum-seeker; (b) education status, the recipient having (b1) tertiary education degree, or (b2) secondary education degree; and (c) involvement with voluntary community work, the recipient (c1) performing community work, or (c2) not performing community work. Across all these profiles the recipient is further characterized as earning less than &euro;700 per month. Such dimensions are randomly assigned in a between-subject design encompassing N=1800 third-party allocators. The stakeholder is characterized as per the median German resident, so that s/he is (a) a German citizen, (b) having secondary education degree, and (c) being involved in voluntary work, and earning more than&euro;700 per month. Moreover, the stakeholder is reported as having performed some work tasks for the researchers (as indeed was the case).  We find that indeed transfers are higher when the recipient is German than when s/he is an immigrant. Transfers are nonetheless higher toward asylum seekers than to economic immigrants.  We also find that performing community work increases transfers to the recipient more than having a high educational degree. In fact, performing community work significantly increases transfers for each of the three recipient migratory types (Germans, economic migrant, asylum seeker), while having a tertiary education degree significantly increases transfers only for asylum seekers. Surprisingly, cumulating both characteristics of having high education and performing community work does not increase transfers but in fact reduces them in comparison to having just one of the two characteristics. Voters from far right political parties are particularly sensitive to recipients performing community work, suggesting that ethnic-based discrimination is malleable to immigrants showing positive disposition toward the receiving community.	Lena Detlefsen; Fabian Paetzel; Christoph Schütt
d3_s01_rl	d3_s01_rl	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room L	Decision Theory & Learning	DANIEL	WOODS	78c9e8	University of Innsbruck	Strategies in the Multi-armed Bandit	This paper analyzes individual behavior in multi-armed bandit problems. We use a between-subjects experiment to implement four bandit problems that vary based on the horizon (indefinite or finite) and number of bandit arms (two or three). We analyze commonly suggested strategies and find that an overwhelming majority of subjects are best fit by either a probabilistic `win-stay lose-shift' strategy or reinforcement learning. However, we show that subjects violate the assumptions of the probabilistic win-stay lose-shift strategy as switching depends on more than the previous outcome. We design two new "biased" strategies that adapt reinforcement learning and myopic behavior by incorporating a bias towards choosing the previous arm. We find that a majority of subjects are best fit by these strategies, which suggests that subjects respond intuitively to bandit arm outcomes, but are biased towards their previously chosen action.	Stanton Hudja, Daniel Woods
d3_s01_rl	d3_s01_rl	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room L	Decision Theory & Learning	YONGPING	BAO	c75fb7	University of Bremen	Human AI Interaction in the Exploration and Exploitation Dilemma	This study examines whether the tendency of human participants to explore vs. exploit predicts how much they use the recommendation of an AI, if the AI has either a bias towards exploration, towards exploitation or reflects a beneficial compromise between exploration and exploitation. Participants play a ten-armed stationary bandit task (Barto et al., 2018). As recommending AI, we use a Kalman Filter model with a parameter (phi) for directed exploration &ndash; a state-of-the-art reinforcement learning algorithm.	Yongping Bao, Ludwig Danwitz, Fabian Dvorak, Sebastian Fehrler, Lars Hornuf, Hsuan-Yu Lin, Bettina von Helversen
d3_s01_rl	d3_s01_rl	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room L	Decision Theory & Learning	ELISA	ORLANDI	27170c	Università di Bologna	Gendered decision making in explore-exploit tasks	The paper aims to investigate whether there is a difference in the way men and women learn. Learning is interpreted as the solution to an exploration/exploitation trade-off.  We focus in particular on the different behaviors in the multi-armed bandit problem. Individuals play a Grain Game which is an exploration task characterized by locally correlated options and constrained movements. In the second stage of the game, participants compete against each other.	Francesca Barigozzi, Natalia Montinari, Elisa Orlandi
d3_s01_rl	d3_s01_rl	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room L	Decision Theory & Learning	JANA	PELIOVA	153d3c	University of Economics in Bratislava	Do I want to study? Experimenting with students’ motivation	Declining tendency in students&acute; achievements is clearly prevailing in the Slovak Republic. It was firstly observed in primary and secondary education when Slovak students underperformed in PISA testing compared to their peers from Visegrad countries and other OECD countries (OECD, 2016). There has also been criticism of the performance of the current university students and graduates who quickly lose interest in their jobs and their fluctuation is high. How to motivate these students to improve their performance? Should we provide financial incentives to students for increased school attendance, for reading, or for better grades? Does intrinsic motivation work for university students? From field experiment performed by Levitt et al (2016) on elementary school pupils, we learned that nonfinancial incentives for younger students are more cost-effective than financial incentives. This however, does not work with older students. Extrinsic rewards can boost intrinsic motivation and habit formation (Cameron et al. 2005; Pierce et al. 2003; Bettinger 2012). If immediate rewards increase students&rsquo; estimated utility returns to education, then properly structured extrinsic rewards could potentially build (rather than crowd out) intrinsic motivation. Few studies document positive effect of financial incentives on academic performance among university students (Herranz-Zarzoso and Sabater-Grande, 2016). In more detail, financial incentives turn out to have positive effects on achievement of high-ability students, whereas they have a negative impact on achievement of low-ability students (Leuven et al. 2010). We performed experiment at the University of Economics in Bratislava on the sample of 132 undergraduate students all having attended compulsory module Finance which was scheduled regularly on a weekly basis during February - April 2017. We used 10 low-stake tests comprising of 10 open questions from the current seminar topic as homework and had to be returned on the next seminar for assessment and feedback. We studied motivation between subjects by providing 4 different treatments: (i) external motivation with egoistic aspect, (ii) external motivation with altruistic aspect, (iii) internal motivation, and (iv) baseline treatment with no specific motivation applied. The preliminary results of between-subject analysis reveal the treatment effect on the final grading of the students. In general, assignment to any treatment increases the final grading compare to the baseline. Participation in the treatments also substantially decrease the retake rate of the final exam. Our results also support the intuition that the lowest participation in tests will be observed in the internal motivation treatment followed by the external motivation with altruistic aspect and external motivation with egoistic aspect. As expected, after the optimistic beginning students&rsquo; activity decreases and stabilize. In addition, during the last two weeks of semester the students&rsquo; activity dropped substantially in all treatments.	Zuzana Brokesova, Jana Péliová
d3_s01_rl	d3_s01_rl	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room L	Decision Theory & Learning	THEODORE	ALYSANDRATOS	30e05b	Heidelberg University	Choosing Whom to Heed: An Experimental Study in Economic Advice	In this paper we ask how an average member of the public can choose the best adviser when presented with two options: one is always correct (&ldquo;expert") and the other is worse than guessing at random, but always suggests the most popular answer (&ldquo;populist&rdquo;). The decision maker is aware of the success probabilities of the two advisers and how the populist&rsquo;s answers are chosen but does not know who is who. Our theoretical model shows that in some cases one is always able to identify the expert. We develop a questionnaire on ten economic policy topics. We use our questionnaire to validate the answers of the expert, using a sample of academic economists, and the answers of the populist, using a representative sample of residents in England and Wales. We administered three treatments among 600 participants, using a representative sample in England and Wales. Our first treatment is a baseline. In the second treatment we give feedback to correct for overconfidence. In the third treatment we ask participants to choose based on the answers of someone else to remove ego-involvement. The second and third treatments are degenerate cases of our theoretical model in which one can always figure out who is the expert. Our participants exhibit a striking inability to identify the expert. In the baseline treatment about 1 in 3 identify the expert, worse than choosing randomly. Correcting for overconfidence improves the outcome to not statistically different from choosing randomly. Removing ego-involvement has no additional effect to correcting for overconfidence. Our results demonstrate that identifying expertise when one is not knowledgeable on a particular topic is a hard problem. In addition, they suggest that populists interested in influencing (economic) policy have an obvious and very powerful strategy available to them, namely, to always endorse the most popular views regardless of their soundness.	Theodore Alysandratos,  Aristotelis Boukouras, Sotiris Georganas, Zacharias Maniadis
d3_s01_rq	d3_s01_rq	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender II	LEA	HEURSEN	9c48c6	LMU MUNICH AND HU BERLIN	Can it Ever Hurt to Ask? Advice-Seeking and Gender	While seeking advice from others can improve performance, it can send a negative signal of ability, with potentially adverse career consequences. This trade-off can impede efficient knowledge flows in organizations.  In this project, we empirically test whether individuals send negative signals of ability strategically and whether the gender stereotype of the work task changes these strategies for women and men. The gender dimension of this project is motivated by mounting evidence that stereotypes matter for performance expectations and that gender impacts how (negative) work performance is judged.  &#9;In a large-sample experiment with white-collar employees, we investigate if men and women strategically send negative signals of ability when deciding to seek advice on a knowledge task. Participants are paid for their performance on the task. In addition, they receive a bonus that increases in a &lsquo;manager&rsquo;s&rsquo; beliefs about their ability to complete the task on their own. The advice can improve paid performance but can lower the manager&rsquo;s beliefs about participants' initial ability. We vary experimentally whether the decision to seek advice is visible to the manager and the gender stereotype of the knowledge task. We test whether stereotypes change women&rsquo;s and men&rsquo;s beliefs about the reputation cost of seeking advice, and, ultimately, their behavior.      Our findings provide causal evidence on whether reputation concerns impede efficient knowledge flows. Moreover, we advance the literature by showing whether women and men change their optimal workplace behavior in anticipation of other's stereotypical views on competence.    	Lea Heursen, Svenja Friess, Marina Chuguova
d3_s01_rq	d3_s01_rq	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender II	NATHALIE	RÖMER	776c4d	Leibniz University Hannover	Why are you the best?  An experimental analysis of the effect of self-promotion on gender bias	In two experimental studies (one involving an ideation task and one involving a math and science task), we analyze the effect of written self-promotions on gender bias. In both experimental studies, decision makers choose between two workers and are incentivized to choose the worker with the higher performance. Between treatments, we vary whether or not decision makers are provided with self-promotions written by the respective workers when making decision. We analyze the effect of providing decision makers with written self-promotions on gender bias of decision making. We find that the effect of written self-promotions on gender bias is two-fold: On the one hand, written promotions contribute to debiasing decision makers. On the other hand, written self-promotions can transmit biases held by workers towards decision makers. In both experimental studies, we find that in a gender revealed context, the debiasing effect outweighs potential biasing effects so that overall we do not find evidence that providing decision makers with workers&rsquo; self-promotions induces gender biases. Instead, our results suggests that providing written self-promotions may be a good means of reducing overall gender biases.	Nathalie Römer; Marina Schröder
d3_s01_rq	d3_s01_rq	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender II	ROBERT	STÜBER	16b8b3	New York University Abu Dhabi	Productivity beliefs, competition entry, and gender quotas	Despite considerable convergence in labor market outcomes, gender inequality persists. This persistence has raised the of question how female entry into competitive environments can be promoted and led to the implementation of affirmative action policies. In this study, we use an experiment to investigate productivity beliefs, entry into competition, and affirmative action policies. First, we analyze what employers infer about productivity from the decision to enter a competition. In particular, we investigate whether they believe that more productive individuals select into competition and whether they do so similarly for men and women. Second, we acknowledge that labor markets are dynamic and important labor market decisions (such as hiring decisions) are made repeatedly, and analyze how winning a first competition affects productivity beliefs. Third, we study how a gender quota affects the belief updating arising from entering a competition and from winning it.	Ernesto Reuben and Robert Stüber
d3_s01_rq	d3_s01_rq	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender II	CHRISTIAN	THOENI	83224f	University of Lausanne	Is there really nothing to see here? On gender differences in preferences	Over the past decades experimental economics has produced a large corpus of stylized facts on risk, time, and social preferences. This data permits to look for systematic gender differences in preferences. While there is some evidence for gender differences, as e.g.\ in risk preferences, other measures suggest that men and women are surprisingly similar on average. The question about their relevance for gender differences in outcomes such as the gender wage gap or female representation across professions remains debated. A major pillar in this literature is Janet Hyde's gender similarities hypothesis, which posits that gender differences are either nonexistent or too small to have explanatory power for differential socio-economic outcomes between men and women. In this article I challenge the empirical basis of the gender similarities hypothesis in preferences. First, I argue that there is a misconception about the relevance of small effect sizes. Second, I show that the current literature on gender effects substantially underestimates gender differences in preferences due to its focus on means differences. 	Christian Thöni
d3_s01_rq	d3_s01_rq	3 Sep 2022	09:15 - 10:45	Room Q	Psychology, Biology & Gender II	SVEVA	VITELLOZZI	027820	University of Florence	Under pressure: the impact of women's mental load on labor productivity and occupational choices. Evidence from Kenya.	Women&rsquo;s mental load is the combination of cognitive and emotional labor. While the former refers to the management behind household activities, the latter is related to the responsibility of other family members&rsquo; feelings and well-being. This load is carried mostly by women (especially mothers) worldwide, and it represents a major barrier for the achievement of gender equality and women&rsquo;s empowerment more broadly. In low- and middle-income countries, this load risks being even more burdensome as women lack access to domestic and external facilities that could substitute for their time and their own housework.  By constantly loading women with pressing concerns related to the household, mental load risks impacting a series of economic outcomes like their labor productivity, their occupational choices, or their preferences, among others. Following the literature on scarcity, this study hypothesizes that mental load can reduce women&rsquo;s labor productivity (first hypothesis) and it can lead to a self-selection into less cognitive and less remunerative jobs (second hypothesis). We posit that there could be two leading mechanisms at place: the former goes through a reduction in cognitive abilities and, more specifically, in attention, while the latter operates through an increase in stress.  To empirically test these hypotheses, we conducted a lab-in-the-field experiment in Nairobi, Kenya, in which participants were primed to trigger in their mind thoughts related to mental load and then they were asked to perform an effort task consisting of an automatic and a more cognitive-demanding task. The effort task lasted 30 minutes and it was divided in three time slots of 10 minutes each. During the first two slots, participants were asked to divide as many black from red beans as possible (i.e., automatic task) and to complete as many Towers of Hanoi (TOH) with 4 disks as possible (i.e., proceduralized task). To test for our second hypothesis, in the last round participants were asked whether they would rather choose a more cognitive demanding and more remunerative task (i.e., the Tower of Hanoi with 5 disks) or whether they would divide beans again.  Our sample consists of 700 individuals with children under the age of 10 recruited in both low- and middle-income neighbourhoods of Nairobi. Preliminary results show that mental load leads both men and women to self-select into less-cognitive demanding tasks and to make a non-rational and non-income maximizing choice. In terms of labor productivity, results show that mental load reduces the total income earned from the effort task for women but not for men. No specific differences in productivity are observed between the two tasks. In terms of leading mechanism, the mediation analysis and the qualitative interviews are showing that results can be ascribed to an increase in stress rather than a reduction in attention.  	Sveva Vitellozzi, Francesco Cecchi, Chiara Rapallini
